Links: [[politics]]

---
﻿
Since the removal of most of the hereditary peers and their replacement with life peers the House of Lords can claim greater professional expertise and so has become much more self-confident in opposing government legislation. It has also lost its in-built Conservative majority and become more balanced in its composition. 

Although the powers of the House of Lords have not changed, the peers' willingness to use them has. For example, from 1999 to 2010 the Labour government suffered more than 450 defeats in the House of Lords, including the latter's successful opposition to Gordon Brown's attempt to increase detention of terrorist suspects to 42 days. In 2015, the Lords provoked even more controversy when it opposed attempts by the chancellor of the exchequer, George Osborne, to cut tax credits. Although this concerned financial legislation and so, according to the Parliament Act 1911, the Lords should not have opposed the government, the Lords claimed that it could vote against the measure as it had been introduced through secondary legislation. In the same manner, the Lords was highly proactive (although ultimately unsuccessful) in opposing the EU (Withdrawal) Bills introduced by the May and Johnson governments.
***
### Salisbury convention

According to the Salisbury Convention, since the House of Lords cannot claim democratic legitimacy, it will not oppose legislation which was in the winning party's manifesto. However, when a government does not have a parliamentary majority, it is more difficult for it to claim that its manifesto has been popularly endorsed by the public. In these circumstances it has been claimed that the Salisbury Convention is in abeyance, providing the Lords with the opportunity to oppose the manifesto commitments of the largest party in government. This was the case during the 2010-15 Conservative/Liberal Democrat coalition. In 2017, Theresa May's failure to secure a parliamentary majority also encouraged the Lords to be more proactive and the government suffered 15 defeats in the upper house over the EU (Withdrawal) Bill. For example, on one notable occasion, in April 2018, the Lords voted by a majority of 123 to insert a clause in the European Union (Withdrawal) Bill that the UK should negotiate to remain in the customs union after Brexit. 

The way in which, in these circumstances, peers have ignored the Salisbury Convention has led to claims that the House of Lords has become too prepared to oppose the government's legislative programme. Lord Forsyth even told the Lords, 'Have a care to what we are doing. We are an unelected House, and this amendment is part of a campaign which is putting peers people'
