Analyse The Divisions That Exist Between Realists and Liberals In Relation To Order, Security and the Likelihood Of Conflict. (12) Politics
Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 6. Comparative Theories
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Remember ➡ For the 12 mark analyse questions, you need to make a synoptic link to one of the
core political ideas (liberalism, conservatism and socialism) at least once in your answer.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
One key difference between realists and liberals on in the international order is whether they
see the international system as anarchic or rules-based.
Realism
Central to realist thought is the idea that the international order is always in a condition of
anarchy, with no overarching global authority that can regulate the behaviour of states or
enforce international rules.
This belief is influenced by conservative Thomas Hobbesʼ analysis that there is anarchy
between individuals within each country if there is no state that can impose order throughAnalyse The Divisions That Exist Between Realists and Liberals In Relation To Order, Security and the Likelihood Of Conflict. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan1
force. As there is no global government/police force, realists similarly believe that in
international politics this leads to anarchy between states.
Realists argue that this anarchic system without a global police force leads to a situation
where the only body that can offer a state protection is the state itself. This leads states to
be driven by maximising their own military power to ensure their own security, whilst also
leading to them being fearful of other states and viewing cooperating with scepticism.
Realists would argue that this explains why states such as India and Pakistan developed
nuclear weapons in the second half of the 20th century, as they believed that only
through developing their own military force could they protect themselves from each
other.
Liberalism
By contrast, liberals argue that the international system isnʼt completely defined by anarchy,
with international laws and rules having significant influence and regulating the behaviour of
states.
This is influenced by their more optimistic view of human nature, driven by the thought of
liberals like John Locke, which they view as rational and capable of cooperation with other
to achieve common goals.
Liberals argue that international organisations like the UN and WTO have created a rules-
based international order, which regulates the behaviour of states and makes possible
cooperation between states to manage shared challenges such as climate change.
For example, under the Paris Agreement states voluntarily committed to reducing
emissions and tackling climate change.
They argue that states comply with these rules the vast majority of the time, as they share
moral principles and recognise the long-term benefits of cooperation. States are reluctant
to break the rules and risk losing out on these benefits.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another major difference between realists and liberals is whether they see conflict between
states in international relations as inevitable.
Realism
Realists argue that the anarchic nature of the international system makes conflict between
states inevitable. As states are the only body that can protect themselves, they naturally seek to
increase their military power in order to increase their security.
However, this is perceived by other states as a threat to their own security, which compels
other states to respond by strengthening their own defences.
Realists call this the ‘security dilemmaʼ, which leads to a cycle of suspicion and escalation
that greatly increases the likelihood of conflict. In fact, realists see conflict as an inevitable
aspect of international politics as a result.
The arms race during the Cold War is a classic example of the security dilemma in action.
As the United States and the Soviet Union each sought to outpace the other in nuclearAnalyse The Divisions That Exist Between Realists and Liberals In Relation To Order, Security and the Likelihood Of Conflict. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan2
weapons development, their defensive measures were interpreted as aggressive, escalating
tensions and leading to a number of proxy wars where millions died.
Liberalism
Liberals strongly disagree and instead argue that conflict isnʼt inevitable in the international
system, especially in the era of globalisation where economic cooperation between states
disincentivises conflict.
Liberals argue that in the 21st century globalised economy, states engage in mutually
beneficial economic relationships. These relationships means that there is complex
interdependence between states.
This disincentivises conflict between states as it would be deeply harmful to both
countriesʼ economies, which states seek to avoid a they are rational actors. For
example, liberals would point to how the competition between the United States and
China in the 21st century hasnʼt led to any military flashpoints, as both statesʼ
economies are highly dependent on each other.
The Democratic Peace Theory further supports liberalismʼs view of conflict as avoidable in
the 21st century. This theory points to the fact that democracies have been much less likely
to go to war with one another because of shared values, institutional checks and
transparency in decision-making.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final important difference between realists and liberals in relation to order and security is what
maintains peace in the international order and whether this peace can only be temporary.
Liberalism
Liberals argue that peace can be maintained in the international order the vast majority of the
time due to international diplomacy and international institutions.
They argue that international organisations such as the WTO and United Nations create
norms/international laws that discourage aggression and establish mechanisms for dispute
resolution, to encourage diplomacy and prevent disagreements leading to armed conflict.
For example, liberals point to how the WTOʼs Dispute Settlement Body DSB provides a
structured mechanism for resolving trade disputes between member countries.
In 2004, this was successful in preventing a dispute between Brazil and the United
States over the latter providing illegal subsidies to its cotton farmers from escalating and
potentially leading to conflict. The WTO confirmed that the U.S. had violated its rules
and the U.S. complied with the ruling.
Realism
Realists strongly disagree and argue that any peace or order in the international system can
only be fragile.
For realists, international organisations have no real power to compel states to act in a
certain way, as states are the most important actors in the international order who have
control over the means of violence.Analyse The Divisions That Exist Between Realists and Liberals In Relation To Order, Security and the Likelihood Of Conflict. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan3
As a result, the only way that peace can be achieved is through a ‘balance of powerʼ, where
states form alliances to counteract each other and prevent any one state from dominating
others. This balance of power can only ever be temporary though, as shifts in power or
alliances can quickly destabilise the system.
For example, there was relative peace following the end of the Cold War due to US
hegemony, but the world is now far less stable as the rise of China and resurgence of
Russia are destabilising the international system.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Analyse how liberals and realists explain the likelihood of war. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedAnalyse The Divisions That Exist Between Realists and Liberals In Relation To Order, Security and the Likelihood Of Conflict. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan4
