Analyse How The Anarchical Society And Society Of States Theory Differs From Realism and Liberalism In Its Understanding Of Global Politics. (12)
Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 6. Comparative Theories
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Remember ➡ For the 12 mark analyse questions, you need to make a synoptic link to one of the
core political ideas (liberalism, conservatism and socialism) at least once in your answer.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
One important way in which Hedley Bullʼs Anarchical Society and Society Of States Theory
disagrees with liberalism is its acknowledgement that there is anarchy in international relations.
The Anarchical Society and the Society Of States Theory
Though Bull doesnʼt agree with realists that there is no order at all in the international system,
he does agree that anarchy is the defining characteristic of global politics, as there is ultimately
no overarching global authority/police force to enforce international law on states.
Bull recognises that this leaves states free to act in their own interests. This being said, he
doesnʼt believe that this will necessarily lead to chaos or perpetual conflict as realists do.Analyse How The Anarchical Society And Society Of States Theory Differs From Realism and Liberalism In Its Understanding Of Global Politics. 12
Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
In this sense, he agrees with conservative Hobbes that individuals/states will act in their
own self-interest in the absence of an overarching authority, but disagrees that this will
necessarily lead to constant conflict and chaos.
Liberalism
Nonetheless, this is a clear disagreement with liberals, who donʼt agree that the international
system is defined by anarchy.
Instead, liberals see the liberal international institutions including the United Nations and
World Trade Organisation as a form of global governance that is effective in establishing a
rules-based international order and enforcing international law.
Though liberals argue that much of this enforcement is dependent on states being willing to
adhere to international law, they point to the fact that it is followed the vast majority of the
time, as it is in states interests to do so and remain a respected member of the international
community.
This reflects the fact that liberals are influenced by classical liberal thinkers such as
John Locke, who argued that individuals are rational and self-interested. As states are
run by individuals, liberals believe that sates will also be rational and follow international
law as it is in their self-interest to do so.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
A key difference between Hedley Bullʼs Anarchical Society and Society Of States Theory and
realism is that Bull believes that norms and rules do play an important role in global politics and
are upheld by states.
The Anarchical Society and the Society Of States Theory
Bull argues that, even though there is international anarchy, there is still a degree of order and
predictability in the international system, due to his idea of the ‘Society of Statesʼ.
Bull argued that, though there isnʼt a global government in the international system, there is
a society of states that share a recognition of norms and rules that govern state behaviour.
These rules arenʼt legally binding, but are upheld by states as they recognise the benefits of
doing so and it means there isnʼt chaos.
These rules include respecting sovereignty, respecting customary rules of war (including
protecting civilians) and using diplomacy as a way to resolve disputes.
Realism
This is therefore a significant disagreement with realists, who argue not only that the
international system is completely anarchic, but that there is no order or set of rules that
governs the behaviour of states.
For realists, states are the only actor with real power in the international system and they
will only ever act in their own self-interest, as they are primarily motivated by maximising
their own power and protecting their own security.
If this self-interest conflicts with any international law/rules, realists argue that states will
always prioritise their own self-interest, as seen with Russiaʼs invasion of Ukraine in 2022Analyse How The Anarchical Society And Society Of States Theory Differs From Realism and Liberalism In Its Understanding Of Global Politics. 12
Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
and the United Statesʼ invasion of Iraq in 2003, both of which violated sovereignty and the
customary rules of war.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final key difference between Bullʼs Anarchical Society and Society Of States Theory and
realism is in relation to whether an anarchic international system leads to inevitable conflict
between states.
Realism
Realists argue that anarchic international system inevitably leads to conflict between states.
For realists, international anarchy means that the only body that can offer a state protection
is the state itself. This leads states to be driven to maximise their own military power to
ensure their own security, whilst also leading to them being fearful of other states and
viewing cooperating with scepticism.
As a result, this leads to the ‘security dilemmaʼ, where one state increasing their security is
viewed as a threat by other states, which leads to them also increasing their security which
leads to a cycle of suspicion and escalation that inevitably leads to conflict.
The Anarchical Society and the Society Of States Theory
Bull disagrees and argues that states often recognise that conflict isnʼt in their mutual interest,
which is why they have created agreed norms and rules through a Society Of States, including
respect for sovereignty and non-intervention in other statesʼ affairs.
This prevents conflict the vast majority of the time and disagrees with realism, as Bull
doesnʼt believe that the lack of an overarching global authority leads states to always be
suspicious of each other, conflicting and unable to manage relationships between each
other to maintain peace.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Analyse How The Anarchical Society And Society Of States Theory Differs From Realism In Its
Understanding Of Global Politics. 12
Analyse How The Anarchical Society And Society Of States Theory Differs From Liberalism In
Its Understanding Of Global Politics. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedAnalyse How The Anarchical Society And Society Of States Theory Differs From Realism and Liberalism In Its Understanding Of Global Politics. 12
Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
