Analyse The Differences Between The Realist Concept Of The Security Dilemma and The Liberal Concept Of Complex Interdependence. (12) Politics
Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 6. Comparative Theories
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Remember ➡ For the 12 mark analyse questions, you need to make a synoptic link to one of the
core political ideas (liberalism, conservatism and socialism) at least once in your answer.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
One key difference between realists and liberals that influences the division between the
security dilemma and complex interdependence is whether they see states as motivated purely
by self-interest.
Realism
Realists are influenced by the writings of early conservatives like Thomas Hobbes and agree
with him that human nature is inherently selfish in the absence of an overarching authority,
which leads to competition and conflict between individuals.
As states are composed of individuals and in the anarchic international system there is no
international government/police force to control the behaviour of states, realists believe thatAnalyse The Differences Between The Realist Concept Of The Security Dilemma and The Liberal Concept Of Complex Interdependence. 12 Politics
Explained 12 Marker Plan1
states are also selfish and competitive as a result.
Realists believe that this results in the security dilemma, as states are primarily influenced
by maximising their own power in relation to other states, including through building up the
strength of their militaries and using them to extend their territory/resources or respond to
threats from others.
This is also because they see international relations as a zero-sum game, where one
state gaining power must inevitably come at the expense of another state.
Liberalism
By contrast, Liberals have a much more optimistic view of human nature. Unlike realists, they
argue that humans are rational and capable of working together to achieve common goals,
demonstrating a shared understanding with classical liberals like John Locke who disagreed
with conservativesʼ views on human nature.
As a result, liberals they believe that states often work together when it is in their mutual
benefit. This leads to peace and cooperation rather than inevitable conflict, especially as
cooperation creates complex interdependence.
This is particularly the case when state share moral principles and values, which they would
argue that Western states do in their commitment to human rights and market capitalism in
international relations.
These states have integrated their economies and security interests deeply as a result,
including through institutions such as NATO and the European Union.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another key difference between realists and liberals is over whether they see conflict as
inevitable in international relations.
Realism
Realists argue that the anarchic nature of the international system makes conflict between
states inevitable. As states are the only body that can protect themselves, they naturally seek to
increase their military power in order to increase their security.
However, this is perceived by other states as a threat to their own security, which compels
other states to respond by strengthening their own defences.
Realists call this the ‘security dilemmaʼ, which leads to a cycle of suspicion and escalation
that greatly increases the likelihood of conflict. In fact, realists see conflict as an inevitable
aspect of international politics as a result.
The arms race during the Cold War is a classic example of the security dilemma in action.
As the United States and the Soviet Union each sought to outpace the other in nuclear
weapons development, their defensive measures were interpreted as aggressive, escalating
tensions and leading to a number of proxy wars where millions died.
Liberalism
Liberals strongly disagree and instead argue that conflict isnʼt inevitable in the 21st century
international system, due to the fact that is defined by complex interdependence.Analyse The Differences Between The Realist Concept Of The Security Dilemma and The Liberal Concept Of Complex Interdependence. 12 Politics
Explained 12 Marker Plan2
Liberalismʼs concept of complex interdependence suggests that states are no longer
isolated actors operating solely to maximise their power in a competitive system. Instead,
their economies and security interests are deeply interconnected.
Liberals argue that this makes conflict much less likely in the 21st century, as states are
rational actors and recognise that they are so interdependent that all states will inevitably
lose out if there is conflict between powerful states.
They would point to the fact that since the end of the Cold War, there were successful
efforts among the worldʼs most powerful states to decrease the number of nuclear
weapons in their arsenals, including the New START treaty signed in 2010.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final key difference between realists and liberals is in relation to whether they see economic
globalisation as changing how states behave in the 21st century.
Liberalism
Liberals argue that economic globalisation has fundamentally changed how states act and the
likelihood of conflict between them.
They argue that conflict is now much less likely than it was prior to globalisation in the mid-
20th century, as global supply chains mean that the economic prosperity of a state in the
21st century is deeply dependent on global stability and cooperation between states.
This deep interdependence discourages conflict, as war or instability in one region has
widespread repercussions for all states.
Liberals highlight the important role that multinational corporations play in this. These
corporations operate across states and their economic interests are strongly tied to peace,
which means they often successfully pressure states to pursue friendly relations with other
states and avoid conflict.
For example, it can be argued that Donald Trumpʼs pursuit of friendlier relations with
Russia in his second Presidency is influenced by the fact that big U.S. oil companies like
Exxon Mobil have a major economic interest in once more working in Russian territory,
which they were forced to stop after the onset of the war in Ukraine.
Realism
By contrast, realists argue that economic globalisation has done nothing to alter the behaviour
of states or the presence of the security dilemma, as states remain the sole protectors of their
own security and therefore continue to increase their military strength and seek to maximise
their power even in the context of economic globalisation.
Realists would point to the fact that there have been escalating tensions between the West
and both Russia and China since the early 2010s, despite the economies of these countries
being deeply interconnected.
Russia invaded Ukraine in 2022 as they saw it as in their core security interests, even
though they knew that they would suffer significant economic harm as a result.
For realists, this shows that states are still primarily motivated by maximising their own
power and protecting their security, which leads to the security dilemma even in theAnalyse The Differences Between The Realist Concept Of The Security Dilemma and The Liberal Concept Of Complex Interdependence. 12 Politics
Explained 12 Marker Plan3
context of economic globalisation.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedAnalyse The Differences Between The Realist Concept Of The Security Dilemma and The Liberal Concept Of Complex Interdependence. 12 Politics
Explained 12 Marker Plan4
