Analyse The Differences BetweenRealist and Liberal Views About Globalisation. (12) Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 6. Comparative Theories
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Remember ➡ For the 12 mark analyse questions, you need to make a synoptic link to one of the
core political ideas (liberalism, conservatism and socialism) at least once in your answer.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
One key difference between realist and liberal views about globalisation is whether they believe
that economic globalisation creates complex interdependence that prevents conflict between
states.
Liberalism
Liberals argue that economic globalisation has fundamentally changed how states act and the
likelihood of conflict between them.
They argue that conflict is now much less likely than it was prior to globalisation in the mid-
20th century, as global supply chains mean that the economic prosperity of a state in the
21st century is deeply dependent on global stability and cooperation between states.
This complex interdependence discourages conflict, as war or instability in one region
has widespread repercussions for all states.Analyse The Differences Between Realist and Liberal Views About Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
This reflects the fact that liberals are influenced by the perspective of classical liberals
like John Locke on human nature. They agree that humans are rational beings driven by
self-interest and argue that, as humans lead states, states will also act rationally and
prevent conflict.
Realism
By contrast, realists argue that economic globalisation has done nothing to alter the behaviour
of states or the presence of the security dilemma, as states remain the sole protectors of their
own security and therefore continue to increase their military strength and seek to maximise
their power even in the context of economic globalisation.
Realists would point to the fact that there have been escalating tensions between the West
and both Russia and China since the early 2010s, despite the economies of these countries
being deeply interconnected.
Russia invaded Ukraine in 2022 as they saw it as in their core security interests, even
though they knew that they would suffer significant economic harm as a result.
For realists, this shows that states are still primarily motivated by maximising their own
power and protecting their security, which leads to the security dilemma even in the
context of economic globalisation.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another important difference between realist and liberal views about globalisation is the
importance of political globalisation and the ability of international institutions to encourage
cooperation between states and adherence to global rules.
Realism
Due to the anarchic international system where states cannot rely on other actors for their
security, realists argue that the international organisations of political globalisation have no real
power to enforce rules or maintain order.
They argue that states only comply with international laws and norms, or cooperate with
other states, when it aligns with their national interest. When these rules conflict with a
stateʼs goals, realists argue that states will abandon them without hesitation.
This is influenced by conservative Thomas Hobbesʼ analysis that individuals act based
solely on self-interest in the absence of an overarching authority to impose rules. In the
international arena, as there is no global police force to enforce its laws, states too act in
their own self-interest and only abide by international law when it is in their interests.
Realists therefore argue that international law isnʼt really law, as international
organisations such as the United Nations and World Trade Organisation have no means
to enforce it.
This can be seen in the United Statesʼ withdrawal from the Paris Agreement under President
Trump, which wasnʼt in the U.S.ʼ interest as a major oil and gas producer.
Liberalism
Liberals, by contrast, argue that international organisations including the UN and WTO do have
significant power to influence the behaviour of states and enforce international rules and laws.Analyse The Differences Between Realist and Liberal Views About Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
They argue that states comply with their rules as they share moral principles and recognise
the long-term benefits of cooperation. States are reluctant to break the rules and risk losing
out on these benefits.
The European Union, for example, has created significant economic cooperation across
27 member states and is effective in enforcing its own laws to manage the relationships
between states, including through its own court; the European Court of Justice ECJ.
Further, liberals argue that political globalisation has successfully encouraged cooperation
between states on the the most pressing global challenges, as demonstrated by the Paris
Climate Agreement, which 195 countries have ratified, signalling their commitment to
tackling climate change.
This liberal belief in the potential for cooperation between states is influenced by the
positive view of human nature supported by classical liberals like John Locke, who
argue that humans are rational beings who are willing to cooperate when it is in their
interest. As states are led by humans, liberals argue that states do the same.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final key difference between realist and liberal views about globalisation relates to the extent
to which they see it as a fundamental transformation to global politics and economics in the
past few decades.
Liberalism
Liberals argue that globalisation is a transformative shift that has significantly altered global
politics and economics in the past few decades, including the importance of nation states.
They suggest that economic globalisation has created a global market places and reduced
the extent to which nation states have control over their own economies, including due to
the power of multinational corporations who have significant economic influence and
transcend border.
Liberals also argue that both political and economic globalisation have ushered in a new era
of global cooperation and peace, as states are much less incentivised to go to war with
each other due to both complex interdependence and international institutions being able to
mediate disputes and foster a shared commitment to liberal values.
Realism
On the other hand, realists disagree that globalisation has fundamentally transformed global
politics and the role of the nation-state. While they agree that globalisation has led to greater
economic cooperation, they also point to the fact that states have been trading with each other
for centuries.
Crucially, they disagree with the argument that globalisation has stopped nation states from
being the most important actor in global politics.
For realists, the nation state remains sovereign and globalisation has done little to alter this
reality, with states continuing to prioritise their national interests and only using international
institutions as tools to pursue their own goals, rather than abiding by their rules.Analyse The Differences Between Realist and Liberal Views About Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedAnalyse The Differences Between Realist and Liberal Views About Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan4
