Analyse The Divisions That Exist Between Realists and Liberals In Relation To The Impact of International Organisations and the Significance of States. (12) Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 6. Comparative Theories
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Remember ➡ For the 12 mark analyse questions, you need to make a synoptic link to one of the
core political ideas (liberalism, conservatism and socialism) at least once in your answer.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
One key difference between realists and liberals is the extent to which they see states as the
dominant actors in global politics.
Realism
A central idea of realism is the belief that states are the primary and most important actors in
global politics.
Realists argue that states alone possess sovereignty; the ultimate authority over their
territory and domestic affairs. This sovereignty enables states to act independently in theAnalyse The Divisions That Exist Between Realists and Liberals In Relation To The Impact of International Organisations and the Significance of States.
12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
anarchic international system, where no overarching authority exists to regulate their
actions.
Crucially, realists also argue that due to the anarchic nature of the international system, the
only body that can provide a state with security is themself, which leads states to focusing
on maximising their military power in particular.
Realists would argue that this explains why states such as India and Pakistan developed
nuclear weapons in the second half of the 20th century, as they believed that only
through developing their own military force could they protect themselves from each
other.
Liberalism
Liberals, by contrast, donʼt view the state as the sole important actors in global politics. Instead
they believe that states are one of many actors that shape global affairs, including international
organisations, non-governmental organisations NGOs) and multinational corporations.
These non-state actors play a crucial role in mediating the relationships between states,
particularly in the 21st century globalised world, where states are more interconnected than
other.
For example, multinational corporations hold significant power due to their economic
importance and the fact that they operate across a number of states.
This can result in them successfully pressuring states to pursue friendly relations with
other states, which is in their economic interest. For example, the economic importance
of U.S. companies such as Apple and Microsoft reportedly played an important role in
Trump deciding to exempt smart phones and computers from his tariffs on China in April
2025.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another importance difference between realists and liberals is how much power they believe
international organisations have to shape the international order and the behaviour of states.
Realism
Due to the anarchic international system where states cannot rely on other actors for their
security, realists argue that international organisations have no real power to enforce rules or
maintain order.
They argue that states only comply with international laws and norms when it aligns with
their national interest. When these rules conflict with a stateʼs goals, realists argue that
states will abandon them without hesitation.
Realists therefore argue that international law isnʼt really law, as international
organisations such as the United Nations and World Trade Organisation have no means
to enforce it.
This can be seen in the United Statesʼ withdrawal from the Paris Agreement under President
Trump, which wasnʼt in the U.S.ʼ interest as a major oil and gas producer.
LiberalismAnalyse The Divisions That Exist Between Realists and Liberals In Relation To The Impact of International Organisations and the Significance of States.
12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
Liberals, by contrast, argue that international organisations including the UN and WTO do have
significant power to influence the behaviour of states and enforce international rules and laws.
They argue that states comply with their rules as they share moral principles and recognise
the long-term benefits of cooperation. States are reluctant to break the rules and risk losing
out on these benefits.
The European Union, for example, has created significant economic cooperation across 27
member states and is effective in enforcing its own laws to manage the relationships
between states, including through its own court; the European Court of Justice ECJ.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final difference between realists and liberals on the significance of states is in relation to how
much influence they believe political leaders have in deciding the behaviour of states.
Liberalism
Liberalsʼ view of how states behave is driven by their view of human nature. This is strongly
influenced by classical liberals such as John Locke, who see humans as rational and capable of
working together to achieve common goals.
Liberals therefore believe that states will act rationally and work together when it is in their
mutual benefit. This is particularly the case when state share moral principles and values,
which they would argue that Western states do in their commitment to human rights and
market capitalism in international relations.
This shows how liberals believe that the instincts of political leaders play a key role in how
states behave. As these individuals are rational, the behaviour of states will be too.
Realism
This contrasts with the views of realists, who believe that the behaviour of all states is driven by
the fact that they operate in a system of international anarchy, where the only body that can
guarantee a stateʼs survival is that state themselves.
This leads to all states seeking to maximise their own power, as this is the only way for
states to protect themselves in a system of international anarchy.
This is influenced by conservative Thomas Hobbesʼ belief that humans will all inevitably
be selfish and competitive in a system of anarchy, as it is the only way to ensure their
survival.
Importantly, realist argue that all states will act in this way, irrespective of the beliefs of their
leaders and whether they are democracies or autocracies. This shows that they see political
leaders as having much less influence over the actions of states compared to liberals, as
they see these actions as structurally determined.
For example, they would point to the fact that both democracies such as the United
States and autocracies such as China and Russia spend significant amounts on their
militaries and have pursued nuclear weapons.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
AnswerAnalyse The Divisions That Exist Between Realists and Liberals In Relation To The Impact of International Organisations and the Significance of States.
12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
Analyse why realists and liberals are divided about the significance of the nation state in global
politics. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedAnalyse The Divisions That Exist Between Realists and Liberals In Relation To The Impact of International Organisations and the Significance of States.
12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan4
