Analyse The Divisions That Exist Between Realists and Liberals In Relation To Human Nature and Power.
(12) Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 6. Comparative Theories
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Remember ➡ For the 12 mark analyse questions, you need to make a synoptic link to one of the
core political ideas (liberalism, conservatism and socialism) at least once in your answer.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
Realists and liberals have a strong disagreement on whether human nature is selfish or
cooperative, which is central to how they believe states behave towards each other.
Realism
Realists are influenced by the writings of early conservatives like Thomas Hobbes and agree
with him that human nature is inherently selfish, competitive and power hungry.
As states are composed of individuals and there is no international government/police force
to control the behaviour of states, realists believe that states are also selfish and
competitive as a result. This is influenced by the fact they canʼt trust other states who are
also selfish and competitive.
Realists believe that this leads to international anarchy and inevitable conflict, with states
constantly in fear of other states and using military force to protect themselves/harm otherAnalyse The Divisions That Exist Between Realists and Liberals In Relation To Human Nature and Power. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
states as a result.
For example, realists would point to Russiaʼs invasion of Ukraine as an example of a
state acting in its own self-interest to maximise its power and compete against NATO
states.
Liberalism
By contrast, Liberals have a much more optimistic view of human nature. Unlike realists, they
argue that humans are rational and capable of working together to achieve common goals,
demonstrating a shared understanding with classical liberals like John Locke who disagreed
with conservativesʼ views on human nature.
As a result, liberals they believe that states can also work together when it is in their mutual
benefit. This leads to peace and cooperation rather than inevitable conflict.
This is particularly the case when state share moral principles and values, which they would
argue that Western states do in their commitment to human rights and market capitalism in
international relations.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another important difference between realists and liberals is whether they see power in itself as
the primary motivation of states.
Realism
As realists believe that all states are selfish and competitive, they believe that all states pose a
threat to each other. Due to this, realists believe that the primary motivation of states is always
to maximise their power in relation to other states.
This is through building up the strength of their militaries and using them to extend their
territory/resources or respond to threats from others. If they donʼt prioritise maximising their
power, particularly their military power, then they are vulnerable to exploitation or invasion
by other states.
This is because they see international relations as a zero-sum game, where one state
gaining power must inevitably come at the expense of another state.
Liberalism
Liberals disagree and see power only as one out of a number of different goals that motivate
the behaviour of states, many of which arenʼt self-interested. This include pursuing moral
principles, shared values and cooperation with other states for mutual economic benefit.
Liberals donʼt disregard power but only see it as a tool to achieve these broader goals. This
is influenced by the fact that liberals donʼt see power as a zero-sum game where one state
increasing in power must come at the expense of another state decreasing in power.
Instead, they believe that states can cooperate in a postive-sum way that is in every stateʼs
benefit and increases all of their power. For example, trade agreements can lead to mutual
gains for states for all states involved.
Paragraph ThreeAnalyse The Divisions That Exist Between Realists and Liberals In Relation To Human Nature and Power. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
Point Of Difference
A final difference between realists and liberals is over whether international organisations have
any power to compel states to abide by international law or work together.
Realism
Realists argue that states are the most significant actors in global politics. As there is an
anarchic international system without a global police force, where only states can protect
themselves from other states, realists believe that international organisations have no real
power to enforce rules or maintain order.
They argue that states will only comply with international laws and norms when it aligns
with their self-interest.
When these rules conflict with a stateʼs goals and desire to maximise their own power,
realists argue that states will simply abandon them and that international organisations have
no power to stop them/enforce the rules as states have a monopoly on the use of force.
For example, the United States has twice withdrawn from the Paris Climate Agreement
under President Trump as it isnʼt in their interest as a state with significant oil reserves.
Liberalism
Liberals, by contrast, argue that international organisations like the UN and WTO do have
significant power to influence the behaviour of states and enforce international rules and laws.
They argue that states comply with their rules as they share moral principles and recognise
the long-term benefits of cooperation. States are reluctant to break the rules and risk losing
out on these benefits.
The European Union, for example, has created significant economic cooperation across 27
member states and is effective in enforcing its own laws to manage the relationships
between states, including through its own court; the European Court of Justice ECJ.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Analyse how the different understandings liberals and realists have of human nature influence
their views on global politics. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedAnalyse The Divisions That Exist Between Realists and Liberals In Relation To Human Nature and Power. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
