Analyse The Different Explanations Realism and Liberalism Have Of The International System. (12) Politics
Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 6. Comparative Theories
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Remember ➡ For the 12 mark analyse questions, you need to make a synoptic link to one of the
core political ideas (liberalism, conservatism and socialism) at least once in your answer.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
One of the most important differences between the explanations that realists and liberals have
of the nature of the international system is about the importance of states and non-state actors.
Realism
A central idea of realism is the belief that states are the primary and most important actors in
global politics. This is central to their explanation of the international system.
Realists argue that states alone possess sovereignty; the ultimate authority over their
territory and domestic affairs. This sovereignty enables states to act independently in the
anarchic international system, where no overarching authority exists to regulate their
actions.
Crucially, realists also argue that due to the anarchic nature of the international system, the
only body that can provide a state with security is themself, which leads states to focusingAnalyse The Different Explanations Realism and Liberalism Have Of The International System. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
on maximising their military power in particular.
Realists would argue that this explains why states such as India and Pakistan developed
nuclear weapons in the second half of the 20th century, as they believed that only
through developing their own military force could they protect themselves from each
other.
Liberalism
Liberals, by contrast, donʼt view the state as the sole important actors in global politics. Instead
they believe that states are one of many actors that shape global affairs, including international
organisations, non-governmental organisations NGOs) and multinational corporations.
These non-state actors play a crucial role in mediating the relationships between states and
shaping the international system, particularly in the 21st century globalised world, where
states are more interconnected than other.
For example, multinational corporations hold significant power due to their economic
importance and the fact that they operate across a number of states.
This can result in them successfully pressuring states to pursue friendly relations with
other states, which is in their economic interest. For example, the economic importance
of U.S. companies such as Apple and Microsoft reportedly played an important role in
Trump deciding to exempt smart phones and computers from his tariffs on China in April
2025.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another key difference between realists and liberals is in relation to the influence of
international organisations and the potential for global governance.
Realism
Due to the anarchic international system where states cannot rely on other actors for their
security, realists argue that international organisations have no real power to enforce rules or
maintain order.
They argue that states only comply with international laws and norms when it aligns with
their national interest. When these rules conflict with a stateʼs goals, realists argue that
states will abandon them without hesitation.
This is influenced by conservative Thomas Hobbesʼ analysis that individuals act based
solely on self-interest in the absence of an overarching authority to impose rules. In the
international arena, as there is no global police force to enforce its laws, states too act in
their own self-interest and only abide by international law when it is in their interests.
Realists therefore argue that international law isnʼt really law, as international
organisations such as the United Nations and World Trade Organisation have no means
to enforce it.
This can be seen in the United Statesʼ withdrawal from the Paris Agreement under President
Trump, which wasnʼt in the U.S.ʼ interest as a major oil and gas producer.
LiberalismAnalyse The Different Explanations Realism and Liberalism Have Of The International System. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
Liberals, by contrast, argue that international organisations including the UN and WTO do have
significant power to influence the behaviour of states and enforce international rules and laws.
They argue that states comply with their rules as they share moral principles and recognise
the long-term benefits of cooperation. States are reluctant to break the rules and risk losing
out on these benefits.
As a result, liberals argue that this creates a form of global governance where the
actions of states are constrained by a rules-based international order and there is
significant cooperation between states to tackle shared challenges.
This is strongly influenced by classical liberals such as John Locke, who see humans as
rational and capable of working together to achieve common goals, which leads to
states doing the same rather than only mistrusting each other and acting in their self-
interest as realists suggest.
The European Union, for example, has created significant economic cooperation across 27
member states and is effective in enforcing its own laws to manage the relationships
between states, including through its own court; the European Court of Justice ECJ.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final difference between realist and liberal explanations of the international system is in
relation to how peace is maintained and whether this can only ever be temporary.
Liberalism
Liberals argue that peace can be maintained in the international order the vast majority of the
time due to international diplomacy and international institutions.
They argue that international organisations such as the WTO and United Nations create
norms/international laws that discourage aggression and establish mechanisms for dispute
resolution, to encourage diplomacy and prevent disagreements leading to armed conflict.
For example, liberals point to how the WTOʼs Dispute Settlement Body DSB provides a
structured mechanism for resolving trade disputes between member countries.
In 2004, this was successful in preventing a dispute between Brazil and the United
States over the latter providing illegal subsidies to its cotton farmers from escalating and
potentially leading to conflict. The WTO confirmed that the U.S. had violated its rules
and the U.S. complied with the ruling.
Realism
Realists strongly disagree and argue that any peace or order in the international system can
only be temporary.
For realists, international organisations have no real power to compel states to act in a
certain way, as states are the most important actors in the international order who have
control over the means of violence.
As a result, the only way that peace can be achieved is through a ‘balance of powerʼ, where
states form alliances to counteract each other and prevent any one state from dominating
others. This balance of power can only ever be temporary though, as shifts in power or
alliances can quickly destabilise the system.Analyse The Different Explanations Realism and Liberalism Have Of The International System. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
For example, there was relative peace following the end of the Cold War due to US
hegemony, but the world is now far less stable as the rise of China and resurgence of
Russia are destabilising the international system.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedAnalyse The Different Explanations Realism and Liberalism Have Of The International System. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan4
