Analyse The Different Explanations Realism and Liberalism Provide For Developments In Global Politics Since 2000. (12) Politics Explained 12 Marker
Plan
Topic ➡ 6. Comparative Theories
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Remember ➡ For the 12 mark analyse questions, you need to make a synoptic link to one of the
core political ideas (liberalism, conservatism and socialism) at least once in your answer.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
One key difference between realists and liberals is whether they see the failure of international
governmental institutions to prevent war as an inherent consequence of the nature of the
international system, or for other reasons.
Realism
Realists explain the failure of the UN Security Council to prevent major conflicts including in
Ukraine, Gaza and Syria as an inherent consequence of the anarchic international system and
the power-driven nature of states in global politics.
They argue that the UNSCʼs failure to act to prevent these conflicts demonstrates how
international institutions have no power to compel states to action, particularly the worldʼsAnalyse The Different Explanations Realism and Liberalism Provide For Developments In Global Politics Since 2000. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker
Plan1
most powerful states who will always act in their own-self interest.
For realists, states are the only actors with real power in global politics and they will
always prioritise their sovereignty and security.
This is influenced by conservative Thomas Hobbesʼ analysis that individuals act based
solely on self-interest in the absence of an overarching authority to impose rules. In the
international arena, as there is no global police force to enforce its laws, states too act in
their own self-interest and only abide by international law when it is in their interests.
For example, the United States has consistently used its veto on the UNSC to block
resolutions critical of Israelʼs actions in Gaza, which include reported war crimes.
It has done so as Israel is a key military ally of the U.S. in the Middle East, which is
important to the security of the United States, whilst its ability to do so supports the
realist arguments that international institutions have no power to compel states to
uphold their rules.
Liberalism
On the other hand, liberals wouldnʼt explain the failure of the UNSC to prevent war as an
inherent failure of international institutions, instead they would argue that this proves the need
to reform the structural flaws of the UNSC, in particular the veto power of P5 or expanding the
security council to include more emerging powers.
Liberals argue that international institutions still play a highly important role in the
international system and that they do have the power to constrain the power of states in
many cases, as well as to bring states together to tackle shared global challenges.
For example, they would point to successful international efforts outside the UNSC
framework, such as the delivery of humanitarian aid in Syria coordinated by the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs OCHA or the role of
international tribunals in prosecuting war crimes, including the arrest warrants issued by the
International Criminal Court for Vladimir Putin and Benjamin Netanyahu.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another important development that liberals and realists have different explanations for is the
shift to a more multipolar world order, particularly the rise of China, and how it has contributed
to greater global instability.
Realism
Realists argue that the shift to a more multipolar world order (away from the unipolarity of the
United States) is an inevitable development that reflects their ‘balance of powerʼ theory.
Realists argue that in an anarchic international system, the only actors that can provide
states with security are states themselves. As a result they are driven by maximising their
own power and also incentivised to form temporary alliances with other states in order to
protect themselves against the most powerful state.
In the 21st century, this can be see in greater cooperation between states including
China, Russia and Iran, including militarily and with the two latter countries providing
China with oil and gas to fuel their economic rise.Analyse The Different Explanations Realism and Liberalism Provide For Developments In Global Politics Since 2000. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker
Plan2
Realists would also argue that the greater global instability of the 21st century in comparison to
the 1990s is the result of power balancing, as alliances and rivalries in a multipolar world are
less predictable, with old alliances shifting and there being greater potential for conflict as a
result.
Liberalism
By contrast, liberals disagree both that the shift to a multipolar world order was inevitable and
that it has necessarily led to greater instability in global politics.
Liberals argue that the key reason for the rise of powers such as India and China is their
integration into the World Trade Organisation and the global system of free trade.
For them, this hasnʼt led to a major challenge to the United States, but has benefitted all
countries as free trade makes all states richer. It also demonstrates how liberal
institutions and principles, including free trade, the WTO and the UN, promote the
economic development of all states.
This liberal perspective is influenced by classical liberals such as John Locke, who
argued that free market capitalism is key to the prosperity of all, as it allows individuals
to build wealth using their rational self-interest and to cooperate with each other for
mutual benefit.
Importantly, liberals also disagree that this has led to greater global instability. Instead they
would point to the fact that there hasnʼt been military conflict between major powers and
they would argue that international institutions have played an important role in this, both by
setting the rules for the international community and by mediating disputes between states.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final key development since 2000 that realists and liberals have different explanations for is
the rise of populism in Western democracies and how this has damaged liberal values such as
the rule of law and democracy globally.
Realism
Realists argue that the rise of populism in Western countries is primarily driven by a rejection of
globalisation and that it demonstrates how states continue to prioritise their own self-interest
and security above any commitment to liberal values or institutions.
For realists, populist policies, such as “America Firstˮ or Brexit, reflect states prioritising
their national interests and asserting their sovereignty against perceived external threats,
such as immigration or economic dependence on foreign powers.
Realists also argue that the rejection of liberal international institutions by many Western
countries reflects the fact that international institutions and agreements have no real power to
compel states to follow their rules.
When these institutions no longer serve a stateʼs interests, the state will simply leave them
or not comply with their decisions, as seen in the UKʼs withdrawal from the EU and the U.S.ʼ
withdrawal from the Paris Climate Agreement.
LiberalismAnalyse The Different Explanations Realism and Liberalism Provide For Developments In Global Politics Since 2000. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker
Plan3
On the other hand, liberals explain the rise of populism as a reaction to the unequal distribution
of globalisationʼs benefits, rather than a fundamental rejection of economic cooperation and
liberal institutions.
They argue that while globalisation has created significant economic growth, it has also left
behind certain groups, leading to dissatisfaction and populist backlash, which can be
solved by greater cooperation between countries to tackle poverty and inequality in global
institutions such as the United Nations.
Further, liberals argue that Western populists are wrong in their rejection of liberal international
institutions, as these institutions are key to promoting Western interests and liberal values such
as human rights, democracy and free trade.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Analyse the different explanations realism and liberalism provide for the changing nature of the
world order since 2000. 12
Analyse the different explanations realism and liberalism provide for the changing influence of
global governance institutions since 2000. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedAnalyse The Different Explanations Realism and Liberalism Provide For Developments In Global Politics Since 2000. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker
Plan4
