Examine The Differences Between ASEAN and The European Union. (12)
Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 5. Regionalism and the EU
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
One important difference between ASEAN and the European Union is that the former is an
intergovernmental regional organisation, whilst the latter combines supranational and
intergovernmental institutions.
ASEAN
ASEAN is an intergovernmental organisation, with decisions made through consensus to ensure
that no member stateʼs sovereignty is compromised. This ensures all member states retain
control over national policy and arenʼt compelled to follow decisions they oppose.
For example, in 2012 Cambodia wasnʼt forced to sign up to a critical joint statement on
Chinaʼs actions in the South China Sea, as it was able to veto the statement.
Since its founding in 1967, ASEAN has always upheld the principle of non-interference in the
domestic affairs of member states.
European Union
By contrast, the EU has a number of supranational institutions, including the European
Commission, European Central Bank and the European Court of Justice, which have theExamine The Differences Between ASEAN and The European Union. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
authority to enforce binding decisions on member states. This means that member states donʼt
retain full sovereignty.
For example, the European Commission took action against Poland in 2021 over its
continued operation of the Turów coal mine, which violated EU environmental laws.
Despite Polandʼs resistance, the EU imposed financial penalties, demonstrating the
supranational authority of its institutions to enforce compliance and how member states
have ceded sovereignty over environmental law.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another difference between the European Union and ASEAN is the extent of economic
integration.
ASEAN
ASEAN established the ASEAN Free Trade Area AFTA in 1992 to lower intra-regional tariffs and
negotiated free trade agreements with major economies such as China and Japan, without
requiring the creation of supranational decision-making bodies.
This has had a significant influence on the economies of its member states as a result,
which have seen impressive economic growth. In 2022 alone, intra-ASEAN trade reached
over $800 billion.
However, member states still retain complete control over their monetary and fiscal policies,
which makes ASEAN much less economically integrated than the EU.
European Union
The EU has far greater economic integration among its member states. It has established a
single market, customs union, and a shared currency among 20 member states, which allows
for the free movement of goods, services, capital, and people across the continent.
Under the Eurozone, 20 EU countries have pooled their monetary policy and ceded
significant control to the European Central Bank.
The common currency of the Euro, along with the single market and customs union, makes
cross-border trade seamless and has significant economic benefits. They facilitate trade
worth over €3.4 trillion annually among EU member states.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final noticeable difference between the European Union and ASEAN is the extent of
agreement and cooperation on foreign policy and security matters.
European Union
The EU has limited security cooperation compared to its economic integration, and decisions on
foreign policy often require unanimity, which can make decisive action difficult.
However, the EU has achieved a significant level of coordination through its Common
Foreign and Security Policy CFSP and has pursued joint actions in response to major
geopolitical challenges.Examine The Differences Between ASEAN and The European Union. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
For example, the EU imposed coordinated economic sanctions against Russia after its 2022
invasion of Ukraine, reflecting member statesʼ agreement on the importance of addressing
such threats and recognition that acting in unity is more powerful.
ASEAN
By contrast, ASEANʼs cooperation on security and foreign policy cooperation is even more
limited due to its intergovernmental nature, strict adherence to the principle of consensus and
foreign policy divisions within some of its member states. This has often resulted in an inability
to respond effectively to regional crises.
For instance, after a military coup in Myanmar in 2021, ASEAN was deeply divided.
Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia and the Philippines pushed for strong measures against the
military junta, while Thailand, Cambodia and Laos argued for non-interference and avoided
taking a hard stance.
This lack of consensus and ASEANʼs intergovernmental nature prevented it from presenting
a strong stance on an important regional crisis as a result.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the similarities between ASEAN and the European Union. 12
Examine the similarities between the Arab League and the European Union. 12
Examine the similarities between the ASEAN and the African Union. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between ASEAN and The European Union. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
