Examine The Similarities Between Semi-Democratic States and Rogue States In Terms Of Their Characteristics and The Consequences For Global Peace andOrder. (12) Politics Explained 12 Marker
Plan
Topic ➡ 4. Power and Developments
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of similarity.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Similarity
A key similarity between rogue states and semi-democratic states is that leaders in both states
a primarily motivated by staying power and they suppress political opposition to do so.
Semi-Democratic States
Semi-democratic states blend the appearance of democracy with authoritarianism in reality.
Leaders use electoral processes as a façade to maintain control while in reality restricting
opposition to ensure they canʼt lose elections and stay in power.Examine The Similarities Between Semi-Democratic States and Rogue States In Terms Of Their Characteristics and The Consequences For Global
Peace and Order. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
Numerous tactics are used to bolster their power and suppress dissent, including control of
the media and interference in the judiciary.
For instance, under Viktor Orbán, Hungary has been labelled an “illiberal democracyˮ as his
government dominated the media, suppresses opposition and curtails opposition through
electoral reforms that disadvantage rival parties, ensuring that himself and his Fidesz party
stay in power.
Rogue States
Leaders of rogue states are also primarily motivated by staying in power, however they are
more overtly autocratic rather than trying to hide it. They openly use repression and violence to
maintain power, including by imprisoning and assassinating political opponents, even if it draws
criticism and breaches international norms.
For example, in North Korea, Kim Jong Unʼs regime relies on extreme measures, such as
public executions and forced labour camps, to suppress any form of dissent and secure his
grip on power.
Reports from human rights organisations estimate that over 120,000 political prisoners are
held in North Koreaʼs prison camps, where torture, starvation, and forced labour are
common.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Similarity
A second similarity between rogue states and semi-democratic states is that they undermine
international institutions and their ability to uphold liberal values such as democracy, the rule of
law and human rights, though they do so in different ways.
Rogue States
Rogue states strongly reject and disregard the norms and legitimacy of liberal international.
They frequently act in defiance of international law, making little effort to align with global
norms and challenging the liberal principles promoted by the U.S.-led international order,
including democracy, human rights and free-market capitalism.
For example, Iran has disregarded international law and agreements, including the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action JCPOA that sought to limit its development of nuclear
capabilities.
It has also funded proxies such as Hezbollah and the Houthis with the intention of
challenging the U.S. and its allies and contributed to major regional instability in the
process.
Semi-Democratic States
Semi-democratic states also undermine liberal international institutions, however they do so
from within. As they still claim to be democracies, they are able to receive the benefits of
membership of institution such as NATO and the UN, whilst also building alliances with
autocratic states and being repressive in practice.
They therefore erode the values of these institutions, which struggle to deal with semi-
democratic states due to their ambiguous status.Examine The Similarities Between Semi-Democratic States and Rogue States In Terms Of Their Characteristics and The Consequences For Global
Peace and Order. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
For example, Turkey is a member of NATO, benefiting from the allianceʼs security
guarantees, yet it has been criticised for democratic backsliding under President Erdoğan
and for building alliances with autocratic states.
Despite this, NATO has been reluctant to act decisively due to Turkeyʼs strategic
importance, creating tensions within the alliance of liberal democracies.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Similarity
A final important similarity between rogue states and semi-democratic states is that they have
posed significant challenges to the United Statesʼ global hegemony due to their willingness to
cooperate and form alliances to challenge the U.S.
Semi-Democratic States
Semi-democratic states align with both democratic and autocratic powers, taking advantage of
their dual status to resist U.S. dominance and using a range of alliances to benefit themselves.
This creates instability and undermines the influence of the European Union and the U.S.
For example, Hungary, an EU member, has developed closer ties with China, joining the Belt
and Road Initiative and allowing Huawei to build its 5G network infrastructure. These actions
align Hungary with autocratic powers, complicating EU efforts to present a unified stance
against Chinaʼs influence and align itself with the U.S.
Rogue States
Rogue states are more aggressive in challenging U.S. hegemony, openly opposing its
dominance and creating alliances among themselves to do so. In particular, China, Russia,
North Korea and Iran have grown closer economically and militarily in recent years.
For example, Iranian-built drones and North Korean troops are being used by Russia in
Ukraine and both Russia and Iran now export a significant majority of their energy reserves
to China, therefore supporting its continued economic growth and ability to compete with
the U.S.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the similarities between democratic and autocratic states in terms of their
characteristics and the consequences for global peace and order. 12
Examine the similarities between failed states and rogue states in terms of their characteristics
and the consequences for global peace and order. 12
Examine the similarities between semi-democratic states and rogue states in terms of their
characteristics and the consequences for global peace and order. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-wExamine The Similarities Between Semi-Democratic States and Rogue States In Terms Of Their Characteristics and The Consequences For Global
Peace and Order. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Similarities Between Semi-Democratic States and Rogue States In Terms Of Their Characteristics and The Consequences For Global
Peace and Order. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan4
