Examine The Criticisms Of The International Criminal Court (ICC) and Special UN Tribunals. (12) Politics
Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 3. Global Governance: Human Rights and Environmental
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of criticism.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Criticism
One major criticism of both the ICC and special UN tribunals is their perceived bias and
selective justice, as they have primarily focused on conflicts involving weaker states, while
ignoring others, especially those tied to influential UN Security Council members or their allies.
The International Criminal Court ICC
The ICC doesnʼt have jurisdiction over 70 states including powerful nations such as Russia,
China and the United States because havenʼt signed the Rome Statute, whilst it does have
jurisdiction over the majority of the worldʼs poorer and weaker states, which have been
pressured by liberal states to sign the Rome Statute.
This has meant that the ICC has disproportionately targeted leaders from weaker or
developing countries, especially within Africa, despite human rights abuses occurring
globally. Up until 2023, all 31 individuals publicly indicted by the ICC were from African
nations, including Uganda, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Sudan.Examine The Criticisms Of The International Criminal Court ICC and Special UN Tribunals. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
Human rights abuses by powerful states or their allies, such as China perpetrating the
Uyghur Genocide and the the U.S.ʼs human rights abuses in Iraq have faced no action.
Special UN Tribunals
Special UN tribunals have faced similar criticisms for their selectivity, often being established to
address atrocities in conflicts involving weaker nations, while ignoring crimes committed by
powerful states or their allies. Further, they have sometimes exclusively focused on one side of
a conflict.
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda ICTR focused exclusively on crimes
committed by the Hutu government, ignoring atrocities committed by the victorious
Rwandan Patriotic Front RPF, which had the backing of the U.S. and the UK. This selective
prosecution undermined its legitimacy.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Criticism
Another important criticism of both the ICC and special UN tribunals is that their effectiveness is
limited by their lack of enforcement mechanisms and reliance on state cooperation to enforce
arrest warrants. This demonstrates one of the key limitations of international law; the lack of a
global police force to enforce it.
The International Criminal Court ICC
The ICC depends on the cooperation of member states to execute arrest warrants and facilitate
investigations, which has often made apprehending suspects challenging.
Omar al-Bashir, the former President of Sudan, avoided arrest for years despite an ICC
indictment for war crimes related to the Darfur conflict, as several states including South
Africa, Kenya and Jordan refused to enforce the warrant when he was visiting their
countries.
Special UN Tribunals
Special tribunals have also been criticised for their dependence on state cooperation to make
arrests and enforce rulings, which has led to victims having to wait years for justice to be
served.
For example, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ICTY failed to
apprehend war criminal Ratko Mladić until 2011 as he was protected by nationalist
sympathisers within Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Criticism
A final criticism levied at both the ICC and special UN tribunals is that they undermine the
sovereignty of states and their national legal systems by imposing external judicial authority.
Special UN Tribunals
Special UN tribunals have often been criticised for imposing international processes that are
driven by Western ideals of human rights and justice. This undermines domestic legal systems
and can leave them less able to address justice and reconciliation independently once the
tribunals conclude their work.Examine The Criticisms Of The International Criminal Court ICC and Special UN Tribunals. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
For example, The ICTY was heavily criticised in Serbia for being perceived as biased
against Serbs. Many Serbians viewed it as a tool of Western powers, undermining its
legitimacy and the tribunalʼs ability to foster reconciliation in the region.
The International Criminal Court ICC
The ICC similarly faces criticism for prosecuting leaders and officials from countries with
functioning legal systems, therefore undermining their ability to address crimes domestically.
For instance, Kenya accused the ICC of undermining its sovereignty during the prosecution
of President Uhuru Kenyatta and Deputy President William Ruto for their alleged role in the
20072008 post-election violence.
While the ICC eventually dropped the charges, the case fuelled widespread domestic
opposition to the Court and its perceived interference in Kenyaʼs internal affairs.
More generally, the perceived bias by the ICC against African countries has led some of them to
threaten withdrawing from the Rome Statute.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the criticisms of the International Criminal Court ICC and International Court of
Justice ICJ. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Criticisms Of The International Criminal Court ICC and Special UN Tribunals. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
