Examine The Differences Between The Effectiveness Of Hard Power and Soft Power In Global Politics. (12) Politics
Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 4. Power and Developments
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
The clearest difference between hard power and soft power is their method of influence, with
hard power relying on coercion and force, whilst soft power relies on persuasion.
Hard Power
Hard power refers to tangible, coercive means such as military action, economic sanctions, or
political pressure to force compliance. It is used by states to directly compel other states or
actors to change their behaviour through the threat or use of punishment.
Russiaʼs invasion of Ukraine in 2022 showcased hard power, as it used its military
capabilities to try to forcibly redraw Ukraineʼs borders. This form of coercion also aimed to
deter further Western integration by Ukraine, such as joining NATO or the EU.
Another example is the European Unionʼs economic sanctions on Iran following it working to
develop nuclear weapons in the early 2010s. The sanctions targeted key sectors such as
banking and oil exports, significantly reducing Iranʼs oil revenue and pressuring the nation to
enter the 2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action JCPOA.Examine The Differences Between The Effectiveness Of Hard Power and Soft Power In Global Politics. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
Soft Power
Soft power, by contrast, depends on persuasion rather than coercion. States use diplomacy,
cultural exports and appeals to shared values to influence other countries to act in a way that
aligns with their interests.
For example, Japanʼs cultural exports, including anime, technology, and Japanese cuisine,
have enhanced its global reputation and helped shape positive perceptions of Japan
worldwide.
This cultural appeal has allowed Japan to strengthen trade relations, attract millions of
tourists annually, and influence international standards, particularly in technology and
cultural preservation, without resorting to military or economic coercion.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another important difference between hard and soft power is whether their use brings results in
the short term or the long term.
Hard Power
Hard power can produce immediate results for a state in a way that soft power cannot,
particularly when an outcome a state desires is unpopular with the international community.
For example, Chinaʼs militarisation of artificial islands in the South China Sea allowed it to
assert dominance and territorial claims in the region swiftly, despite international
condemnation and ongoing disputes with the Philippines and other neighbouring countries.
Further, hard power is often the only effective response when dealing with actors that do not
respond to diplomacy or persuasion.
In cases where states or non-state actors are aggressive or violate international law, hard
power becomes indispensable for defending oneself and enforcing international norms.
For example, in response to Russiaʼs invasion in Ukraine, the Ukrainian army has
conscripted adult men and countries including Germany, the U.S. and the U.K. have
provided significant military aid to Ukraine.
Soft Power
By contrast, soft power achieves influence over the long term by building trust and
cooperation. While its results are slower to materialise, soft power fosters sustainable
relationships and alliances that can have more long terms impact.
For example, the 2008 Beijing Olympics was a strategic use of soft power by China to
enhance its international image in the long-term. Through a highly publicised and
successful event, China showcased its modern infrastructure and rising global status.
The games were viewed by billions worldwide, helping to shift international perceptions of
China as a powerful and emerging global player, which improved its international alliances
and trade links in the long-term.
Paragraph Three
Point Of DifferenceExamine The Differences Between The Effectiveness Of Hard Power and Soft Power In Global Politics. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
A final difference between hard power and soft power is the influence they have on a countryʼs
reputation.
Soft Power
Soft power enhances a stateʼs global reputation and legitimacy as peaceful and a responsible
advocate of values such as democracy cooperation. States that successfully wield soft power
are often seen as moral or cooperative leaders, which can translate into increased influence in
global governance and the ability to shape international norms and lead global initiatives
through persuasion rather than force.
For example, the European Unionʼs ambitious climate goals and offer of financial support to
developing nations for green transitions has solidified its reputation as a global advocate for
environmental sustainability and enhanced its influence in global governance on
environmental issues.
Hard Power
By contrast, hard power can damage a stateʼs reputation and erode its legitimacy. The
limitations of hard power in this context are apparent when coercion leads to accusations of
imperialism, human rights abuses, or unjust aggression.
States that rely too heavily on military interventions or economic sanctions often face global
backlash, losing credibility and weakening their ability to influence others through
attraction.
This can be seen in the reduced legitimacy and support received by the Israeli state after it
killed over 50,000 in the Israel-Gaza war in 20232025. This was seen in the fact that
European leaders openly criticised Netanyahu when they hadnʼt before.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the similarities between the effectiveness of hard power and soft power in global
politics. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between The Effectiveness Of Hard Power and Soft Power In Global Politics. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
