Examine The Similarities Between The International Court of Justice (ICJ) and International Criminal Court (ICC). (12)
Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 3. Global Governance: Human Rights and Environmental
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of similarity.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Similarity
One important similarity between the ICC and ICJ is that both lack enforcement mechanisms
and rely on state cooperation for enforcement. This limits the effectiveness of both courts in
upholding human rights.
The International Court of Justice ICJ
Even when states accept the ICJʼs jurisdiction, they often ignore rulings that arenʼt in their
interests, which they are able to do as the ICJ lacks enforcement mechanisms of its own and
therefore relies on state cooperation.
For example, in 2019 The Gambia brought a case to the ICJ against Myanmar, accusing it of
genocide against the Rohingya Muslim population. Although the ICJ issued a provisional
ruling ordering Myanmar to take immediate measures to protect the Rohingya, Myanmarʼs
government largely ignored the ruling.
The International Criminal Court ICCExamine The Similarities Between The International Court of Justice ICJ and International Criminal Court ICC. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
The ICC also faces significant challenges in enforcing its decisions, as it depends on the
cooperation of member states to execute arrest warrants and facilitate investigations, which
has often made apprehending suspects challenging.
Omar al-Bashir, the former President of Sudan, avoided arrest for years despite an ICC
indictment for war crimes related to the Darfur conflict, as several states including South
Africa, Kenya and Jordan refused to enforce the warrant when he was visiting their
countries.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Similarity
Another similarity between the ICC and ICJ is that they lack global jurisdiction, as states can
decide to opt out of their rulings/jurisdiction.
The International Court of Justice ICJ
The ICJ can only hear cases if states consent to its jurisdiction, either through treaty
agreements or by explicitly accepting its jurisdiction for specific disputes. Russia, China and the
United States among others donʼt permanently recognise the ICJʼs jurisdiction, so the ICJ can
only rule in a case involving them if they consent to it on a case by case basis.
For example, in response to Ukraineʼs claim of genocide in 2022, the ICJ issued an advisory
opinion that ordered Russia to immediately halt its military operations in Ukraine. However,
Russia refused to comply, claiming that the ICJ had no jurisdiction.
The International Criminal Court ICC
The ICCʼs jurisdiction is also limited, as 70 states have refused to sign the Rome Statute,
including the United States, China and Russia, as they donʼt want their government
officials/leaders to be prosecuted for human rights abuses.
This means that the ICC doesnʼt have jurisdiction over these countries and canʼt act against
individuals from these nations, limiting its ability to uphold human rights and undermining its
global mandate.
As Russia, China and the U.S. are also members of the UN Security Council, it means that the
UNSC is very unlikely to recommend prosecutions to the ICC against them or any of their close
allies.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Similarity
A final similarity between the ICC and ICJ is that they have both been criticised for bias and
selective justice, as they have primarily focused on conflicts involving weaker states, while
ignoring others, especially those tied to influential UN Security Council members or their allies.
The International Criminal Court ICC
The ICC doesnʼt have jurisdiction over powerful nations such as Russia, China and the United
States because havenʼt signed the Rome Statute, whilst it does have jurisdiction over the
majority of the worldʼs poorer and weaker states, which have been pressured by liberal states
to sign the Rome Statute.Examine The Similarities Between The International Court of Justice ICJ and International Criminal Court ICC. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
This has meant that the ICC has disproportionately targeted leaders from weaker or
developing countries, especially within Africa, despite human rights abuses occurring
globally. Up until 2023, all 31 individuals publicly indicted by the ICC were from African
nations, including Uganda, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Sudan.
Human rights abuses by powerful states or their allies, such as China perpetrating the
Uyghur Genocide and the the U.S.ʼs human rights abuses in Iraq have faced no action.
The International Court of Justice ICJ
The ICJ has faced similar criticism for failing to hold powerful states accountable due to the
influence of geopolitics. Cases involving UNSC members or their allies are rarely brought
before the ICJ, which has primarily heard cases involving smaller states.
For instance, no case has been brought against the United States for human rights
violations during its War on Terror, despite widespread reports of torture and indefinite
detention in Guantanamo Bay and Abu Ghraib prison.
This shows how the U.S.ʼs power has enabled them to pressure other states into not holding
them to account for human rights violations.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the differences between the International Court of Justice ICJ and International
Criminal Court ICC. 12
Examine the differences between special UN tribunals ECHR and the International Criminal
Court ICC. 12
Examine the similarities between special UN tribunals ECHR and the International Criminal
Court ICC. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Similarities Between The International Court of Justice ICJ and International Criminal Court ICC. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
