Examine The Factors That Drive Economic Globalisation and Political Globalisation. (12) Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 1. The State and Globalisation
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of comparison.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Comparison
One central driver of both economic globalisation and political globalisation is international
governmental organisations IGOs), which have facilitated cooperation and trust between
countries and therefore increased interaction and interdependence.
Economic Globalisation
The World Trade Organisation WTO has been central to driving economic globalisation by
encouraging countries to engage in free trade and reduce tariffs. By facilitating trade
negotiations and enforcing agreements, the WTO has allowed countries to cooperate and trust
each other more effectively.
This significantly increased global trade. Since the WTOʼs creation in 1995, the volume of world
trade more than tripled, from $5 trillion in 1995 to over $22 trillion in 2021.
Political Globalisation
Similarly, the United Nations UN in particular has driven political globalisation by giving
countries an international framework to discuss and tackle the worldʼs most pressingExamine The Factors That Drive Economic Globalisation and Political Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
challenges.
For example, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change holds regular
conferences COPs) that bring almost every country in the world together to cooperate on
tackling climate change.
COP21, for example, led to the signing of the 2015 Paris Agreement, which committed 196
countries to limiting global warming.
Without the United Nations, this international political cooperation almost certainly wouldnʼt
have happened.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Comparison
An important difference between the drivers of economic and political globalisation is that
private interests and corporations have played an important role in driving economic
globalisation, whilst they havenʼt done so for political globalisation. This has led to global
politics being much less integrated than the global economy.
Economic Globalisation
Multinational corporations MNCs) have been key drivers of economic globalisation by creating
transnational supply chains and investing heavily in foreign markets, therefore significantly
increasing economic interaction and dependence between countries. They do so as it is in their
economic interests to have lower labour costs and bigger markets to sell to.
For example, Apple has established a global supply chain by outsourcing production to China
and other countries, while also sourcing components from suppliers worldwide, including
Japan and South Korea.
Additionally, Apple has provided significant foreign direct investment FDI across the world
by having offices in Singapore, London and Munich, whilst selling its products in over 175
countries.
Political Globalisation
Global politics is much less integrated than the global economy, as it isnʼt driven by private
corporations acting in their economic interests. Instead, it relies on the voluntary cooperation of
governments, which are often reluctant as they want to maintain national sovereignty.
This was demonstrated by Brexit, as the UK decided to leave the European Union to regain
sovereignty. This allowed it to make more unilateral decisions on trade, immigration and
other issues, rather than having to compromise with other European countries.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Comparison
A final factor that drove both economic and political globalisation was the hegemony of the
United States in the post-Cold War period. Both economic and political globalisation have faced
challenges and decline as the world has become more multipolar in recent years.
Economic GlobalisationExamine The Factors That Drive Economic Globalisation and Political Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
The United States was instrumental in promoting economic globalisation after the Cold War by
championing international trade agreements and neoliberal policies.
It often did so in cooperation with the International Monetary Fund IMF, World Trade
Organisation and World Bank, which it has significant power over due to its economic
supremacy.
The rise of China and a more bipolar world order has challenged economic globalisation in
recent years, as it has led to the decreased influence of the World Trade Organisation and a
trade war between the U.S. and China that has seen significant tariffs.
Political Globalisation
US hegemony in the post-Cold War period also drove political globalisation by promoting liberal
democratic values and cooperation between countries to pursue them through IGOs such as
the United Nations and NATO.
For example, the UN Security Council authorised humanitarian interventions to protect
human rights in Bosnia, Somalia and Sierra Leone.
As China and Russia have become more powerful and assertive in recent decades and sought
to challenge US influence, this political globalisation and cooperation has stopped.
For example, both countries have used their UNSC vetoes to prevent coordinated
international action to protect human rights in countries such as Syria and Myanmar.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the factors that drive political globalisation and cultural globalisation. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Factors That Drive Economic Globalisation and Political Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
