Examine The Ways In Which Both Liberal Economies and Democracy Have Been Challenged In Recent Decades. (12) Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 4. Power and Developments
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of comparison.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Comparison
One important challenge to both liberal economies and democracy in recent years has been the
rise of populism in Western states, including powerful countries such as Brazil and the United
States.
Liberal Economies
Populist leaders in the West have criticised the globalised liberal economy for creating
inequality, blaming free trade, international agreements, and global elites for domestic
economic inequality and resentment.
This has led to a rise in protectionist policies and economic nationalism, which have
undermined the principles of free markets and trade that underpin liberal economies.
For example, Donald Trumpʼs second presidency has seen the imposition of a 10% tariff on all
countries, as well as higher tariffs on steel, cars and China.Examine The Ways In Which Both Liberal Economies and Democracy Have Been Challenged In Recent Decades. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
This shift towards protectionism was driven by claims that free trade agreements had led to
job losses in U.S. manufacturing, appealing to domestic discontent with globalisation.
Democracy
Populist leaders have also weakened democratic norms by centralising power, criticising
independent judiciaries, and undermining media freedom. Their rhetoric often pits “the peopleˮ
against “the elites,ˮ which erodes trust in democratic processes and institutions.
For instance, Jair Bolsonaroʼs presidency in Brazil saw attempts to erode judicial
independence, as he publicly attacked the Supreme Court and Electoral Court for opposing
his agenda.
His repeated claims of election fraud, despite no evidence, aimed to delegitimise Brazilʼs
electoral system so that he could stay in power. Though he was unsuccessful, this
undermined public confidence in democracy.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Comparison
Another important way that liberal economies and democracy have been challenged in recent
decades is that liberal international institutions have been weakened and undermined.
Liberal Economies
The World Trade Organisation WTO in particular has been weakened in the past decade, as
powerful states have disregarded its rulings and it has found itself unable to prevent a trade war
between the U.S. and China.
Under Trumpʼs first presidency, a trade war between the U.S. and China quickly escalated,
with both countries placing major tariffs on each other. Although the WTO ruled in 2020 that
U.S. tariffs violated global trading rules, the U.S. rejected the ruling and the two countries
sought to resolve the dispute bilaterally, rather than through the WTO.
This shows how international organisations upholding liberal economies have weakened
in their ability to maintain free trade and resolve disputes.
Additionally, the U.S. under Trump severely weakened the WTOʼs dispute resolution
mechanism by blocking appointments to its appellate body, effectively paralysing its
capacity to resolve trade disputes.
Democracy
International organisations that promote democracy, such as the United Nations and European
Union, have also been undermined in recent years, due to the rise of semi-democratic states
that claim to still be democracies but have leaders who undermine democracy to stay in power.
These countries have eroded the values and power of these institutions, which struggle to
deal with semi-democratic states due to their ambiguous status.
For example, Poland and Hungary have curtailed judicial independence, limited press
freedoms, and repressed civil society while remaining EU members. Despite mechanisms
like Article 7 of the EU Treaty, which aims to hold members accountable for breaches of
democratic values, the EU has struggled to take decisive action which had undermined its
ability to promote democracy across the world.Examine The Ways In Which Both Liberal Economies and Democracy Have Been Challenged In Recent Decades. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
Paragraph Three
Point Of Comparison
A final way in which democracy and liberal economies have been challenged in recent decades
is that both China and Russia have grown in power, challenged U.S. hegemony and sought to
export their political models.
Liberal Economies
Chinaʼs state-managed capitalism, which combines market mechanisms with heavy
government control, has emerged as an alternative to liberal free-market capitalism. Due to its
success in reducing poverty, this model has become and inspiration for many countries in the
Global South.
For instance, Ethiopia has had success replicating Chinaʼs model of state-led
industrialisation, using government investments to develop infrastructure and attract foreign
investment.
China has promoted its economic model by building partnerships with over 140 countries
through the Belt and Road Initiative BRI, under which it has invested an estimated $1 trillion
in infrastructure like ports, railways, and energy plants in other countries. This has also
weakened liberal economies as it has been an alternative source of financial assistance to
the IMF and World Bank.
Democracy
Russia and China have also undermined democracy by working together to discredit
democracy, reduce the influence of the United States and promote autocracy ad an alternative.
Russiaʼs interference in the 2016 U.S. election through disinformation campaigns and
cyberattacks aimed to destabilise trust in the democratic process and weaken the
perception of U.S. global leadership.
Similarly, China has promoted its “Beijing Consensus,ˮ which prioritises economic growth
and stability over political freedoms. This has appealed to leaders in developing nations as
an alternative to Western democracy that allows them to maintain their power in the long-
term.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the different ways in which the rule of law and democracy have been in decline in
recent decades. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Ways In Which Both Liberal Economies and Democracy Have Been Challenged In Recent Decades. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
