Examine The Differences Between Economic and Political Regionalism.
(12) Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 5. Regionalism and the EU
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
A important difference between economic and political regionalism is that deep economic
integration can be achieved through intergovernmental institutions, whilst deep political
integration requires supranational institutions.
Economic Regionalism
Economic regionalism allows states to cooperate on economic matters without ceding
sovereignty. Intergovernmental institutions can facilitate free trade areas, tariff reductions, and
negotiate free trade agreements without other states, without the need for supranational
decision making.
This is because the is often complete agreement among members of a regional organisation
of the benefits of reducing tariffs and promoting free trade.
For example, ASEAN established the ASEAN Free Trade Area AFTA to lower intra-regional
tariffs and negotiated free trade agreements with major economies such as China and
Japan, without requiring the creation of supranational decision-making bodies.
Political RegionalismExamine The Differences Between Economic and Political Regionalism. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
By contrast, political regionalism requires greater political alignment and states being willing to
cede sovereignty in some areas. This is because deep political cooperation requires
supranational institutions that can make decisions and enforce laws even when there is
disagreement, particularly in regional organisations with a significant number of members.
For example, the European Union has developed supranational institutions like the European
Commission and the European Court of Justice, which have the authority to make binding
decisions even when some member states disagree.
The European Court of Justice ruled in 2018 that Polandʼs judicial reforms violated EU law,
requiring Poland to reverse changes that threatened judicial independence.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another key difference is that states often prioritise economic regionalism and are much more
reluctant to integrate politically. When political regionalism does take place, it is often built on
top of existing economic regionalism.
Economic Regionalism
States are typically more willing to engage in economic regionalism because it provides
immediate, tangible benefits, such as growth in exports and foreign investment, without
requiring politically sensitive concessions and ceding any sovereignty.
Both the Arab League and the African Union have made significant progress in economic
regionalism.
The African Continental Free Trade Area AfCFTA has been agreed to by 54 African Union
member states and is projected to increase intra-African trade by up to 52%.
The Greater Arab Free Trade Area GAFTA of the Arab League was agreed in 1997 and has
also significantly increased intra-Arab trade. For example, Jordanʼs exports to other Arab
League members have increased by over 300%
Political Regionalism
When political regionalism does occur, it is often built upon initial economic integration, as
states recognise the benefits of working together.
The European Union began as an economic community with the 1957 Treaty of Rome,
which established the European Economic Community EEC to promote free trade and
economic cooperation.
Over time, this foundation enabled deeper political integration, culminating in the Maastricht
Treaty of 1993, which created the European Union and introduced shared policies in areas
like foreign affairs, justice, and security.
States are comparably much less willing to engage in political regionalism, though, due to a
desire from leaders to maintain sovereign control and because of complicated political
dynamics and divisions in many regions.
Despite integrating economically, this has meant that ASEAN, the Arab League and the
African Union have made little progress to integrate politically and havenʼt followed the
example of the EU.Examine The Differences Between Economic and Political Regionalism. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
Both economic and political regionalism protect smaller states in a global economy, however an
important difference is that political regionalism allows for small states to more effectively
navigate global competition between China and the United States.
Economic Regionalism
Economic regionalism allows smaller states to amplify their bargaining power in a competitive
global economy. By forming regional blocs, these countries can negotiate collectively with
larger powers, ensuring they arenʼt dominated in trade negotiations or economic competition.
For example, ASEAN has protected its smaller member states such as Laos and Cambodia
by securing for them favourable trade terms with large economies such as China, Japan
and Australia through the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership RCEP.
Without this trade agreement, they may have had to trade on far less favourable terms and
been exploited economically by these larger economies.
Political Regionalism
Political regionalism extends this protection into the political realism and allows small countries
to navigate the global competition between the United States and China effectively in a way that
economic regionalism cannot.
The European Union has been able to be a significant player despite this global competition,
as its deep political integration has meant is has been able to articulate an agreed stance on
global issues rather than being divided. For example, it has led the rest of the world by
strongly supporting measures to tackle climate change.
In contrast, ASEANʼs lack of a unified stance on the South China Sea issue illustrates the
challenges of limited political regionalism. There is significant disagreement between
Vietnam and the Philippines who oppose Chinaʼs action and Cambodia and Laos who
support it. This has prevented ASEAN from standing up to China and presenting a clear
message.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the differences between economic and security regionalism. 12
Examine the differences between political and security regionalism. 12
Examine the similarities between economic and political regionalism. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between Economic and Political Regionalism. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
