Examine The Differences Between A Unipolar and Multipolar World Order.
(12) Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 4. Power and Developments
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
The most obvious and important difference between a unipolar and multipolar world order is
how much power is distributed between different countries in global politics.
Unipolar World Order
A unipolar world is dominated by a single hegemon that has unrivalled economic, military, and
political power, allowing it to dictate global rules and politics with little opposition. The hegemon
is able to compel other states to act in its interests and can use its supreme military power to
enforce its will and vision of the international system.
For example, following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the United States emerged
as the worldʼs sole superpower, maintaining dominance through economic influence,
unparalleled military spending and cultural hegemony. At its peak it had 25% of global GDP
and accounted for 40% of global defence spending.
Multipolar World Order
By contrast, a multipolar world order several states with significant power, leading to a state of
global politics where no single state can dominate. Power is distributed among multiple powersExamine The Differences Between A Unipolar and Multipolar World Order. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
in different parts of the world, each influencing their respective regions and engaging in
complex alliances and rivalries.
The current global order is increasingly multipolar, with the rise of China and Russia
challenging U.S. dominance and other countries including Turkey, India and Saudi Arabia
also pursuing their own interests through military action and economic support for proxies.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another important difference between a unipolar and multipolar world order is whether they
lead to stability or conflict and constant competition for supremacy.
Unipolar World Order
Unipolarity promotes stability in the world order, as the hegemon can act as a global police
force to enforce global norms. As they have military supremacy, they can also deter other states
from acting against their interests or challenging the international order.
For example, U.S. dominance in the 1990s and early 2000s led to a significant number of
U.S.-led humanitarian interventions to uphold human rights, maintain peace and serve
American interests, including in Somalia, Kosovo and Afghanistan.
Multipolar World Order
Multipolarity, on the other hand, creates a less stable and more violent international order as the
balance of power between multiple great powers often leads to competition, mistrust, and
shifting alliances that can escalate into conflict.
Without a clear hegemon to enforce norms and act as a deterrent, states are more likely to
take risks to increase their power and disputes are more likely to be resolved through
confrontation than cooperation.
For example, the multipolar world order of the early 20th century saw shifting alliances between
powers like Germany, Britain, and Russia, contributing to the outbreak of World War I. Similarly,
the interwar periodʼs multipolarity failed to prevent the rise of aggressive powers like Nazi
Germany and Imperial Japan, culminating in World War II.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final difference between a unipolar and multipolar world order is how effectively the
international community can come together to address collective challenges, such as climate
change and human rights protection.
Unipolar World Order
In a unipolar world order, the hegemon often has the structural power to lead collective action
on pressing global challenges and compel states to sign up to international agreements, even if
they arenʼt in their immediate economic interests.
For example, during the unipolar dominance of the United States in the 1990s, it led the
Kyoto Protocol negotiations, compelling major economies to agree to legally binding
commitments on reducing greenhouse gas emissions, even though this required costly
domestic policy changes and developing states werenʼt required to do the same.Examine The Differences Between A Unipolar and Multipolar World Order. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
The U.S.ʼs ability to leverage its economic and political influence as the sole superpower in
global politics ensured broad participation in the agreement.
Multipolar World Order
A multipolar system, however, makes global cooperation on issues such as climate change and
nuclear arms reduction far more difficult. This is as states are competing for global influence
and therefore unwilling to sacrifice their immediate economic interests to tackle a shared
challenge.
For example, international efforts to tackle climate change in the past decade have been
hindered by disagreements between major polluters like China, India, and the U.S. with each
prioritising their economic growth over environmental commitments. This can be seen in the
fact that U.S. has twice pulled out of the Paris Agreement under Trump and the fact that
China continues to build new coal power stations in 2025.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the differences between a unipolar and bipolar world order. 12
Examine how a unipolar and multipolar world order lead to different levels of conflict in global
politics. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between A Unipolar and Multipolar World Order. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
