Examine The Similarities Between Economic and Security Regionalism.
(12) Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 5. Regionalism and the EU
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Similarity
One similarity between economic and security regionalism is that both have had significant
success in creating stability and reducing conflict within regions.
Economic Regionalism
Economic regionalism promotes stability by fostering interdependence among states. By
integrating their economies, states not only build relationships of trust and shared interest, they
also increase the potential damage of war. This makes disputes far less common and far less
likely to lead to war, creating long-term stability.
For example, the European Union was initially created as an economic project through the
European Coal and Steel Community ECSC with the specific intention of preventing war on
a continent that had started two world wars in the 20th century.
The ECSC bound the economies of France and Germany together and has been highly
successful in preventing any wars on the continent involving EU countries since.
Security RegionalismExamine The Similarities Between Economic and Security Regionalism. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
Security regionalism also creates stability and prevents conflict, as by pooling defence
resources together, states within a region can create a much greater deterrence to outside
actors.
For instance, NATOʼs Article 5 commits members to collective defence and has been
successful in preventing war against its members since its formation in 1949. In particular, it
has deterred the Soviet Union/Russia from aggressive actions against its member states.
Further, by sharing intelligence, military technology and pursuing joint strategies, security
regionalism can allow countries to find and respond to threats more effectively and prevent
further escalation. This is also seen in NATO and other security alliances.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Similarity
Another important similarity between economic and security regionalism is that both have
become increasingly important to weak states that require protection in a globalised economy.
Economic Regionalism
Economic regionalism has allowed smaller states to amplify their bargaining power in the
competitive globalised economy of the past few decades. By forming regional blocs, these
countries can negotiate collectively with larger powers, ensuring they arenʼt dominated in trade
negotiations or economic competition.
For example, ASEAN has protected its smaller member states such as Laos and Cambodia
by securing for them favourable trade terms with large economies such as China, Japan
and Australia through the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership RCEP.
Without this trade agreement, they may have had to trade on far less favourable terms and
been exploited economically by larger economies, especially China and the United States
which are competing for global economic supremacy.
Security Regionalism
Similarly, weaker states benefit from security regionalism by joining alliances or organisations
that pool resources and provide collective defence. This ensures that smaller states have
protection against larger, more aggressive powers and access to security arrangements that
they could not sustain on their own due to their smaller economies.
The African Unionʼs Peace and Security Council PSC pools resources and coordinates
regional efforts to address conflict and instability, which otherwise may spill over into
neighbouring countries and create damaging regional instability.
For example, the AU successfully intervened in Somalia through AMISOM and prevented
further destabilisation in the region. Bordering countries Kenya, Ethiopia and Djibouti all
contributed troops, alongside other African countries, as stability was in their interest.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Similarity
A final similarity between economic and security regionalism is that they can be implemented to
different extents and in both intergovernmental and supranational institutions.
Economic RegionalismExamine The Similarities Between Economic and Security Regionalism. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
Economic regionalism occurs in intergovernmental regional organisations including the Arab
League, ASEAN and the African Union, which all have free trade areas and negotiate trade
agreements with other countries. However, it also occurs in the supranational European Union
where there is much deeper integration.
For example, ASEAN has established the ASEAN Free Trade Area AFTA to reduce tariffs
among its members and negotiated major trade agreements like the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership RCEP with China, Japan, and other countries.
This has all been achieved with ASEAN being an intergovernmental organisation where
limited sovereignty has been ceded.
The EU goes beyond just a free trade area, but also includes a monetary union which is
managed in part by the European Central Bank ECB, a supranational institution that EU
member states cede decision-making power and therefore sovereignty to.
Security Regionalism
Security regionalism similarly operates on a spectrum from intergovernmental arrangements to
supranational institutions.
For example, NATO operates with a supranational military command structure that enables
quick, unified responses to crises, as seen in its interventions in the Balkans in the 1990s.
By contrast, ASEANʼs security mechanisms remain intergovernmental, relying on dialogue
between countries and consensus-based approaches without any country losing a veto.
This is through the ASEAN Regional Forum ARF, which facilitates dialogue and cooperation
on security issues.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the similarities between political and security regionalism. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Similarities Between Economic and Security Regionalism. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
