Examine The Differences BetweenClassical Economic Development Theory and Dependency Theory. (12)
Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 2. Global Governance: Political and Economic
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
One important difference between classical economic development theory and dependency
theory is in relation to whether global capitalism is a positive force that is able to alleviate
poverty, or whether it maintains the underdevelopment of the worldʼs poorest nations.
Classical Economic Development Theory
Classical economic development theory is rooted in the thought of Adam Smith and argues that
global capitalism and free markets are the most effective ways to reduce poverty and foster
economic growth.
It suggests that by integrating into the global economy, countries in the Global South can
specialise in industries where they hold a comparative advantage, boosting productivity and
growth and helping them to decrease poverty.
Vietnam is often cited by those who support this theory, as their embrace of free-market
reforms and export-led growth from the 1980s significantly reduced poverty, with Vietnamʼs
poverty rate dropping from over 50% in 1993 to less than 6% by 2019.Examine The Differences Between Classical Economic Development Theory and Dependency Theory. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
Dependency Theory
Dependency theory strongly disagrees and sees global capitalism as a central cause of poverty
and underdevelopment, rather than being a solution to it. They argue that multinational
corporations MNCs) exploit the labour and resources of poorer countries and prevent them
from developing their own industries, whilst transferring the profits to wealthier countries.
For example, the vast majority of Sub-Saharan African countries remain heavily reliant on
the export of raw materials, such as oil and minerals, while much of the profit goes to richer
nations, leaving African economies vulnerable to global price fluctuations and much of their
populations living in poverty. The average poverty rate in sub-Saharan Africa is around
41%.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another difference between classical economic development theory and dependency theory is
their stance on the importance of state intervention to development.
Classical Economic Development Theory
Classical economic development theory supports minimal state intervention and argues that
free markets and private enterprise are the most efficient way to promote economic growth.
This viewpoint dominated the thinking of the IMF and World Bank in the 1980s and 1990s and
they made the implementation of free market reforms conditions for receiving loans, in what
were known as Structural Adjustment Programmes SAPs).
For example, in the 1970s Jamaica implemented an SAP in return for the IMFʼs economic
assistance to help it pay its ballooning debt bill. The SAP included cuts in public services
and subsidies, along with trade liberalisation and privatisation of state-owned companies.
Dependency Theory
Proponents of dependency theory strongly disagree and argue that minimal state intervention
only leaves poor countries more exposed to global capitalism, deepening their poverty and
underdevelopment.
They point to the fact that the SAPs of the 1980s and 1990s were hugely damaging and in
fact increased poverty. For example, in Zambia an SAP led to led to the privatisation of its
copper mines, which resulted in widespread job losses and increased poverty rates; by
1996, 68% of Zambians were living in poverty, up from 49% a decade earlier.
They instead argue that intentional, state-driven strategies that focus on self-reliance and
decoupling from the global economy are central to economic development.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final key difference is whether they see poverty and underdevelopment as caused by factors
within countries that can be addressed through economic reforms, or whether they highlight
the structure of the international economy as the source of the problem.
Classical Economic Development TheoryExamine The Differences Between Classical Economic Development Theory and Dependency Theory. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
Classical economic development theory attributes poverty to internal factors such as inefficient
governance, lack of infrastructure, and insufficient integration into global capitalism.
It believes that countries can achieve economic development by addressing these issues
and learning from the free-market capitalism of the United States and other Western
countries.
For example, the economic growth of the East Asian Tigers in the late 20th century is
attributed to internal reforms that allowed foreign investment and export-led growth.
Dependency Theory
Dependency theory strongly disagrees and argues that the poverty and underdevelopment of
the Global South is a structural feature of global capitalism where the developed countries are
rich because they exploit and benefit from the resources and labour of poorer nations, which
are prevented from achieving economic growth and alleviating poverty as a result.
For example, Nigeria is one of the worldʼs largest oil producers, yet over 40% of its
population still lives in extreme poverty, with much of the oil wealth benefiting foreign
corporations who extract the wealth.
As a result, dependency theorists believe that poverty cannot be addressed without
fundamentally changing the structure of the global economy.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the differences between the classical economic development theory and structural
theory. 12
Examine the differences between the classical economic development theory and world
systems theory. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between Classical Economic Development Theory and Dependency Theory. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
