Examine The Main Criticisms Of Humanitarian Interventions and Human Rights Courts. (12) Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 3. Global Governance: Human Rights and Environmental
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of criticism.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Criticism
Perhaps the most powerful criticism of both human rights courts and humanitarian interventions
is that they are biased, as they have focused almost exclusively on addressing human rights
violations in weaker states, whilst ignoring those perpetrated by permanent UN Security
Council members or their allies.
Humanitarian Interventions
The humanitarian interventions that were prominent in the 1990s and early 2000s were driven
by the United States and all occurred in states that were relatively weak and small, including
Somalia, Bosnia and East Timor.
Human rights werenʼt similarly upheld in response to violations that were carried out by
powerful states or their allies, particularly those on the UN Security Council.
For example, during the War on Terror, reports of human rights abuses by the United States,
including torture at Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo Bay, went unpunished.Examine The Main Criticisms Of Humanitarian Interventions and Human Rights Courts. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
So did Israelʼs alleged human rights violations, both in the Palestinian Territories in the
2000s and more recently in Gaza in 2024, due to Israel being an important ally of the United
States and other Western powers.
Human Rights Courts
International human rights courts such as the International Criminal Court ICC and
International Court of Justice ICJ have faced similar criticisms of bias and selective justice as
they have also disproportionately targeted weak states whilst failing to prosecute human rights
violations by powerful states.
Influenced by the fact that powerful nations such as Russia, China and the United States
havenʼt signed the Rome Statute, the ICC has disproportionately targeted leaders from
weaker or developing countries, especially within Africa.
Up until 2023, all 31 individuals publicly indicted by the ICC were from African nations,
including Uganda, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Sudan.
The ICJ has faced similar criticism for failing to hold powerful states accountable due to the
influence of geopolitics, with no case brought against the U.S.ʼs abuses in the War on Terror
or Chinaʼs ongoing Uyghur Genocide.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Criticism
Another important criticism of both human rights courts and humanitarian interventions is that
they undermine the sovereignty of national governments.
Humanitarian Interventions
Humanitarian interventions have been criticised as they override state sovereignty to prevent
human rights abuses and therefore undermine national governments. This has in particular
been criticised by China and Russia, which are strong supporters of state sovereignty and
argue that the west has often used humanitarian justifications to cover its strategic objectives.
For example, Russia and China strongly opposed NATOʼs intervention in Libya in 2011,
arguing that the West exceeded the UN mandate for civilian protection and used the mission
to achieve regime change by overthrowing Muammar Gaddafi. This undermined the
sovereignty of Libyaʼs government by meddling in its internal affairs.
Human Rights Courts
Human rights courts have also been criticised for undermining the sovereignty of states and
their national legal systems by imposing an external judicial authority.
Special UN tribunals have been criticised for imposing international processes that are
driven by Western ideals of human rights and justice.
This undermines domestic legal systems and can leave them less able to address
justice and reconciliation independently once the tribunals conclude their work.
The ICC has faced similar criticism for prosecuting leaders and officials from countries with
functioning legal systems, therefore undermining their ability to address crimes
domestically.Examine The Main Criticisms Of Humanitarian Interventions and Human Rights Courts. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
For instance, Kenya accused the ICC of undermining its sovereignty during the
prosecution of President Uhuru Kenyatta and Deputy President William Ruto for their
alleged role in the 20072008 post-election violence. While the ICC eventually dropped
the charges, the case fuelled widespread domestic opposition to the Court and its
perceived interference in Kenyaʼs internal affairs.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Criticism
A further criticism of humanitarian interventions and human rights courts is that they have been
ineffective in achieving their central aim of upholding human rights, either due to the collateral
damage they cause or due to their lack of enforcement powers.
Humanitarian Interventions
Humanitarian interventions have been criticised for causing major civilian casualties. Military
interventions, even those justified by humanitarian motives, inherently carry the risk of
collateral damage that can undermine the very human rights they aim to protect.
For example, NATO bombings in Kosovo 1999, while aimed at protecting the ethnic
Albanian population from violence by Serbian forces, mistakenly targeted civilian
infrastructure, including hospitals, schools, and residential areas, leading to the deaths of
hundreds of civilians.
Human Rights Courts
Human rights courts have also been criticised for failing to achieve their central aim of
upholding human rights, as they rely on state compliance and lack the power to enforce their
rulings.
For example, in 2019 The Gambia brought a case to the ICJ against Myanmar, accusing it of
genocide against the Rohingya Muslim population. Although the ICJ issued a provisional
ruling ordering Myanmar to take immediate measures to protect the Rohingya, Myanmarʼs
government largely ignored the ruling.
This demonstrates the limitations of human rights courts in upholding human rights as they
lack the enforcement powers that national courts have.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the different ways that humanitarian interventions and human rights courts uphold
human rights. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Main Criticisms Of Humanitarian Interventions and Human Rights Courts. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
