Examine The Criticisms Of The United Nations Security Council and NATO.
(12) Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 2. Global Governance: Political and Economic
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of criticism.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Criticism
One significant criticism of both the United Nations Security Council UNSC and NATO is their
uneven power dynamics, which exclude smaller member states and allow the worldʼs richest
and most powerful countries to dominate.
United Nations Security Council
The structure of the UNSC has been criticised for concentrating power in the hands of the five
permanent members P5  the United States, United Kingdom, China, Russia, and France - who
wield veto power.
Even though ten other countries are members of UNSC at any time on a rotating basis, they
lack veto power and therefore the ability to challenge the worldʼs most powerful countries,
who often use their vetoes to protect themselves and their allies.
For example, Russia has used its veto power repeatedly to block resolutions condemning its
actions or those of its allies. It has vetoed 16 resolutions related to the Syrian Civil War since
2011 to shield the Assad regime from international accountability for its human rights abuses.
Similarly, in 2022, Russia vetoed a resolution condemning its invasion of Ukraine,
showcasing how the P5 can exploit their veto power to avoid scrutiny and accountability,Examine The Criticisms Of The United Nations Security Council and NATO. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
even in cases of clear aggression.
NATO
Similarly, NATOʼs decision-making is dominated by its most powerful members, particularly the
United States, which contributes approximately 70% of the allianceʼs defence spending. This
disproportionate influence allows the U.S. to shape NATOʼs strategic priorities in line with its
own geopolitical interests, often sidelining the concerns of smaller European allies.
For instance, the U.S. pressured NATO to invoke its collective defence mechanism (article 5
following 9/11 and NATO allies supported U.S. operations in Afghanistan during the War on
Terror. This was despite 9/11 not being a clear attack by a state and the War on Terror to
furthering its central mission of defending against Russian aggression.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Criticism
Another key criticism of both the UNSC and NATO is that they are inconsistent in their response
to different conflicts due to geopolitical interests, which impedes their ability to pursue their
aims and protect peace and human rights fairly for all populations.
United Nations Security Council
The UNSC has often been accused of selectively intervening in conflicts based on the strategic
interests of its P5 members, rather than based on its role of protecting citizens against war and
human rights abuses.
For instance, the UNSC authorised military intervention in Iraq following its invasion of
Kuwait in 1990, a conflict that directly threatened the oil interests of the United States. By
contrast, it has failed to take decisive action to address the humanitarian crisis in Yemen,
due to the U.S. and U.K.ʼs support for Saudi Arabia which is a key player in the conflict.
This shows how geopolitical interests frequently undermine the Councilʼs mandate to
maintain international peace and security.
NATO
NATO has similarly faced criticism for inconsistency, particularly in conflicts outside its Euro-
Atlantic sphere. Its interventions in these regions have been seen as selective and driven by
member statesʼ political or economic interests rather than universal principles of security and
upholding peace, which has undermined their power as a deterrence.
For example, in 2011, NATO intervened militarily in Libya to protect civilians from the Gaddafi
regime, citing humanitarian grounds and receiving UN approval for a no-fly zone.
However, NATO didnʼt intervene in Syriaʼs civil war, where the death toll exceeded 500,000,
reflecting hesitancy to act where Russia is directly involved.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Criticism
A final criticism that has been levied at both the UNSC and NATO is that they are outdated in
todayʼs multipolar world, as they were designed and structured for the post-WWII world where
European states France and the United Kingdom were powerful and the Soviet Union was the
main strategic competitor to the West.Examine The Criticisms Of The United Nations Security Council and NATO. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
United Nations Security Council
The UNSCʼs structure, established in 1945, no longer reflects the realities of the modern world,
where the former empires of France and Britain have significantly declined in power and other
powers such as Japan, India and Brazil have emerged.
These emerging powers have consistently called for reform to make the Council more
representative of the current world-order which is less Western-dominated and more
multipolar, as well as to include the developing world.
Africa, despite being home to 28% of UN member states and many of its peacekeeping
missions, has no permanent representation on the UNSC. This imbalance has led to growing
demands for reform to address these inequalities and enhance the legitimacy of UNSC
decisions.
NATO
NATO, too, has been criticised for being a relic of the Cold War, structured primarily to counter
the Soviet Union. Critics argue that its relevance has diminished in a world where China is
increasingly viewed as the Westʼs primary strategic competitor, and global security threats are
no longer confined to state actors.
NATOʼs recent expansion with Finland and Sweden joining has been criticised for provoking
tensions with Russia while failing to address growing security concerns in the Indo-Pacific
region, where Chinaʼs influence is rapidly rising.
In particular, some politicians in the United States are beginning to question whether their
security guarantee to Europe is in their strategic interests given Russia is no longer their
most significant competitor.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the limited ability of NATO and the United Nations in upholding peace internationally.
12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Criticisms Of The United Nations Security Council and NATO. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
