Examine The Differences Between The European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) and The International Court ofJustice. (12) Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 3. Global Governance: Human Rights and Environmental
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
One important difference between the ECHR and the ICJ is in relation to their geographical
focus and mandates.
The European Court of Human Rights ECHR
The ECHRʼs jurisdiction is limited to the 46 member states of the Council of Europe, and its
mandate is to enforce the European Convention on Human Rights, so that member states
uphold the civil and political rights enshrined in the Convention.
For example, the United Kingdom is a member of the Council of Europe and in Hirst v.
United Kingdom 2005, the ECHR ruled that the UKʼs blanket ban on prisoner voting
violated Article 3 of the ECHR, therefore pressuring the United Kingdom to uphold the
political rights of prisoners.
The International Court of Justice ICJExamine The Differences Between The European Court of Human Rights ECHR and The International Court of Justice. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker
Plan1
By contrast, the ICJʼs jurisdiction is global. It adjudicates on disputes between states and issues
advisory opinions on international legal matters referred to it by the UN. Unlike the ECHR, its
mandate is therefore global and broader, focusing on issues including violations of international
law and territorial disputes.
For example, in 2018 the ICJ resolved a territorial dispute between Costa Rica and
Nicaragua over the San Juan River. It ruled that Nicaragua must compensate Costa Rica for
environmental damage and both states accepted and complied with the ruling.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another important difference between the ECHR and ICJ is the extent to which their decisions
are enforceable and binding on states.
The European Court of Human Rights ECHR
Decisions made by the ECHR are binding, and member states are required to comply with the
Courtʼs rulings. The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe seeks to ensure the
implementation of the ECHRʼs judgments by monitoring statesʼ compliance.
For example, in Goodwin v. United Kingdom 2002, the ECHR ruled that the UKʼs failure to
legally recognise gender reassignment violated the applicantʼs rights under the European
Convention on Human Rights. Following the ruling, the UK introduced the Gender
Recognition Act in 2004 to comply with the judgment.
This being said, there are limitations to the ECHRʼs enforcement mechanisms. For example,
Russia which was expelled from the Council of Europe in 2022 due to repeated instances of
non-compliance.
The International Court of Justice ICJ
The ICJ arguably has far less success than the ECHR in enforcing its rulings. The ICJʼs rulings
are binding only if states accept its jurisdiction and even when states do accept its jurisdiction,
they often ignore rulings that arenʼt in their interests.
For example, in 2019, The Gambia brought a case to the ICJ against Myanmar, accusing it of
genocide against the Rohingya Muslim population. Although the ICJ issued a provisional
ruling ordering Myanmar to take immediate measures to protect the Rohingya, Myanmarʼs
government largely ignored the ruling, highlighting the Courtʼs dependence on state
compliance and its lack of enforcement mechanisms.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final difference between the ECHR and ICJ is whether citizens/organisations can bring cases
to be heard by the court, or whether only states can do so.
The European Court of Human Rights ECHR
The ECHR is a unique international court as it allows individuals, NGOs, or groups to directly file
complaints against states, empowering citizens to hold governments accountable for human
rights violations. This strengthens the ECHRʼs impact on domestic legal systems and often
results in law changes.Examine The Differences Between The European Court of Human Rights ECHR and The International Court of Justice. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan2
For example, in Siliadin v. France 2005, the ECHR ruled against France for failing to
protect a the 15 year old defendant from forced labour, pushing France to revise its legal
protections against modern slavery.
The International Court of Justice ICJ
By contrast, the ICJ exclusively hears cases between states. Individuals and organisations
cannot directly approach the court, limiting its ability to address violations of international
law/human rights that donʼt involve state disputes.
This limits the ICJʼs influence over domestic legal frameworks and peopleʼs lives, especially
as the ICJʼs advisory opinions on legal issues are non-binding and cannot directly compel
state action.
For example, in response to Ukraineʼs claim of genocide in 2022, the ICJ issued an advisory
opinion that ordered Russia to immediately halt its military operations in Ukraine. Despite the
ruling, Russia refused to comply and continued its invasion.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the similarities between the European Court of Human Rights ECHR and the
International Court of Justice. 12
Examine the differences between the European Court of Human Rights ECHR and the
International Criminal Court ICC. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between The European Court of Human Rights ECHR and The International Court of Justice. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan3
