Examine The Differences Between The Role and Significance Of The World Trade Organisation (WTO) and The Role and Significance Of The G7/G20.
(12) Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 2. Global Governance: Political and Economic
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
One important difference between the WTO and G7/G20 is in relation to their scope. The WTO
focuses narrowly on trade, whilst the G7/G20 address a much wider range of global challenges.
The World Trade Organisation WTO
The World Trade Organisationʼs specific role within global economic governance is to ensure
that global trade flows as predictably and freely as possible. It does so by facilitating trade
negotiations so that countries reduce tariffs and by settling disputes between countries to
prevent destabilising trade wars.
For example, the WTO facilitated the Bali Trade Facilitation Agreement 2013 which
simplified global customs procedures. This reduced trade costs by an estimated 14.3% on
average, directly boosting global trade by making it more free.
The G7/G20Examine The Differences Between The Role and Significance Of The World Trade Organisation WTO and The Role and Significance Of The G7/G20.
12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
By contrast, the G7 and G20 are much less specialised and their meetings address a wide range
of the worldʼs most pressing challenges including climate change, economic inequality and
geopolitical conflicts.
For example, at the G20ʼs Rio de Janeiro Summit in 2024, the G20 launched a multilateral
initiative titled ‘the Global Alliance Against Hunger and Povertyʼ and backed increased
infrastructure investment in developing countries. This included a $2.89 billion deal
between Brazilʼs development bank BNDES and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
AIIB.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another important difference in their role and significance is in relation to their structure, with
the WTO having a more formal, rules-based structure than the G7/G20.
The World Trade Organisation WTO
The WTO was established in 1995 and has been a permanent feature of global economic
governance since, with 164 member countries representing 98% of global trade. These
countries sign up to its rules of promoting free trade and the WTO has formal mechanisms to
settle disputes and prevent trade wars.
The WTOʼs Dispute Settlement Body DSB provides a structured mechanism for resolving trade
disputes between member countries, in order to prevent them escalating into trade wars. When
one country believes another is violating WTO agreements, it can bring the issue before the
DSB for resolution.
For example, in 2004, the DSB ruled that the United States had violated WTO agreements by
providing illegal subsidies to its cotton farmers, which harmed Brazilian farmers. As a result,
the U.S. agreed to pay $300 million in compensation to Brazil and reform its agricultural
policies.
The G7/G20
Unlike formal international governmental organisations like the UN or WTO, the G7 and G20 lack
binding powers and donʼt have permanent secretariats. Instead, they are forums for dialogue
between the worldʼs most powerful leaders, where agreements reached are based on political
consensus rather than enforceable commitments.
Both the G7 and G20 meet annually for leadersʼ summits to discuss key global challenges.
The presidency of the G7 rotates annually among the member countries, and the host
country sets the agenda for the year.
As they are attended by world leaders, these summits can play a crucial role in addressing
the most pressing global challenges of the day.
For example, the 2024 G7 Summit in Apulia, Italy led to an important agreement to
provide Ukraine with $50 billion in loans to support its war effort versus Russia.
Paragraph Three
Point Of DifferenceExamine The Differences Between The Role and Significance Of The World Trade Organisation WTO and The Role and Significance Of The G7/G20.
12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
A final difference between the significance of WTO and G7/G20 is that membership of the WTO
is open to all countries and gives them an equal voice, whilst the G7 and G20 are dominated by
the worldʼs wealthiest nations.
The World Trade Organisation WTO
The WTO operates on a “one country, one voteˮ system, ensuring that it isnʼt dominated by
developed, Western countries and giving developing countries a platform to influence global
trade policies in their interest.
For example, progress to a trade agreement under the Doha Development Round failed to
progress due to developing countries refusing to give developed countries greater access
to their markets without refusing to cut agricultural subsidies that harm poorer farmers.
This shows how developing countries had the power to protect their economies against the
worldʼs wealthiest nations.
The G7/G20
By contrast, the G7 and G20 are exclusive forums, representing only a fraction of the worldʼs
wealthiest nations. The G7 includes only seven highly industrialised countries, while the G20
excludes over 80% of the worldʼs countries, including many small and developing nations.
This lack of representation undermines the legitimacy of these groups as forums for global
governance, as the decisions made naturally follow the interests of the worldʼs wealthier
nations.
For example, the G20ʼs pledges to address global inequality through initiatives like the Debt
Service Suspension Initiative DSSI have been criticised by developing states for being
temporary and insufficient.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the similarities between the role and significance of the World Trade Organisation
WTO and the role and significance of the G7/G20. 12
Examine the limitations of both the World Trade Organisation WTO and the G7/G20. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between The Role and Significance Of The World Trade Organisation WTO and The Role and Significance Of The G7/G20.
12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
