Examine The Differences Between Economic Globalisation and Political Globalisation. (12) Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 1. The State and Globalisation
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
An important difference between economic and political globalisation is that economic
globalisation is driven primarily by the desire for profit and economic growth, whilst political
globalisation is driven and was founded on upholding ideals such as human rights, equality and
peace.
Economic Globalisation
Rather than being driven by nation states and their leaders like political globalisation, economic
globalisation was also driven by private companies, especially multinational corporations
MNCs).
MNCs desire for profit led to economic globalisation as global supply chains allowed them
to take advantage of cheap labour and large export markets. This was also then supported
by Western governments as the growth of these MNCs boosted their GDP.
For example, Nikeʼs use of offshore production in Southeast Asia enables the company to
take advantage of lower labour costs in countries like Vietnam, where its factories employExamine The Differences Between Economic Globalisation and Political Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
over 500,000 workers.
Political Globalisation
By contrast, political globalisation was driven by European and North American statesʼ desire to
promote liberal values including human rights, democracy and peace.
The International Criminal Court ICC was created in 2002 to promote human rights and
justice by holding individuals accountable for crimes such as genocide and war crimes.
States have no economic incentive to create this international institution, but did so to
uphold human rights and peace globally.
Similarly, the European Union, although partly motivated by economic integration, was also
established and has expanded in the 21st century to promote democracy, liberal values, and
peace in Europe.
For example, its expansion in the early 2000s included countries like Poland and
Hungary, where membership was tied to adopting democratic reforms and upholding
the rule of law.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another difference is their impact on the internal sovereignty of nation-states. Whilst both
reduce state sovereignty, economic globalisation arguably does so to a much greater extent
than the international institutions of political globalisation, which have limited enforcement
mechanisms.
Economic Globalisation
Economic globalisation has made each countryʼs economy deeply connected to other
countries/MNCs and therefore dependent on their decisions. This has permanently reduced the
sovereignty government have over their national economies and extent to which they can
control them.
MNCs and global trade networks have limited the ability of governments to control their
countryʼs labour markets, which are very dependent on how MNCs decide to structure their
supply chains.
In the 1990s, for example, Ford shifted parts of its manufacturing operations from the UK to
Eastern Europe to reduce labour costs, leading to the closure of several UK factories and
significant job losses in the British auto industry.
Political Globalisation
By contrast, political globalisation hasnʼt led to such a significant loss of sovereignty for the
vast majority of countries. Though countries have been willing to engage with and work through
international organisations such as the United Nations and ASEAN, they have been largely
unwilling to give up any veto powers over decisions, therefore maintaining their sovereignty.
A clear example of this is the majority of the worldʼs supranational institutions, including
ASEAN, the Arab League and African Union, which have created free trade areas, but have
been unwilling to become supranational institutions like the European Union. Instead, they
have maintained as intergovernmental organisations where each state retains veto power
and sovereignty.Examine The Differences Between Economic Globalisation and Political Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final key difference is that economic globalisation often creates conflict and competition
between states, whilst political globalisation is designed to resolve this conflict and promote
cooperation.
Economic Globalisation
Economic globalisation create conflict between large states in particular, as they compete for
global economic power through access to markets, resources and dominance in important
sectors such as renewable energy and technology.
For instance, the USChina trade war, which began in 2018, resulted in tariffs on over $550
billion worth of goods, disrupting global supply chains and escalating tensions between the
two largest economies.
Similarly, competition for rare earth metals, which are essential for high-tech industries like
electronics and defence, has intensified, with China producing over 70% of the global
supply, prompting the US to invest in alternative sources in Australia and Canada to reduce
reliance and maintain strategic autonomy.
Political Globalisation
By contrast, political globalisation seeks to resolve conflicts and foster cooperation.
International governmental organisations IGOs) play a central role in giving countries a
framework to resolve disputes and work to tackle shared challenges.
The World Trade Organisation WTO provides a platform for resolving trade disputes between
nations through its Dispute Settlement Body DSB, helping to prevent trade wars and ensure
fair competition. It has handled over 600 disputes since its establishment.
Similarly, the Paris Agreement shows how political globalisation can unite countries to combat
shared challenges. The agreement was signed at COP21 and committed 196 countries to limit
global warming.
Without the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, this international
political cooperation almost certainly wouldnʼt have happened.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the similarities between economic globalisation and political globalisation. 12
Examine the differences between cultural globalisation and political globalisation. 12
Examine the ways that economic and political globalisation impact the developing world. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_ExplainExamine The Differences Between Economic Globalisation and Political Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between Economic Globalisation and Political Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan4
