Examine The Differences Between Supranational and Intergovernmental Approaches To Regionalism. (12)
Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 5. Regionalism and the EU
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
Perhaps the most important difference between supranational and intergovernmental
institutions is that the sovereignty of member states is fully maintained in intergovernmental
institutions, but in supranational institutions states have to cede some sovereignty.
Intergovernmental Approaches
Intergovernmental regionalism ensures that states retain full control over their policies, allowing
them to cooperate without compromising their sovereignty at all.
For example, ASEAN relies on consensus-based decision-making and operates on the
principle of non-interference in membersʼ domestic affairs. This allows states to collaborate
on economic issues like trade while ensuring their sovereignty remains intact.
For example, in 2012 Cambodia wasnʼt forced to sign up to a critical joint statement on
Chinaʼs actions in the South China Sea, as it was able to veto the statement.
SupranationalismExamine The Differences Between Supranational and Intergovernmental Approaches To Regionalism. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
On the other hand, supranational institutions are given the authority to override national
governments in certain areas of policy and enforce compliance among member states. This is
as member states have decided to cede some sovereignty to these supranational institutions.
For example, the European Commission took action against Poland in 2021 over its
continued operation of the Turów coal mine, which violated EU environmental laws.
Despite Polandʼs resistance, the EU imposed financial penalties, demonstrating the
supranational authority of its institutions to enforce compliance and how member states
have ceded sovereignty over environmental law.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another important difference is that in intergovernmental institutions, decisions are made by
consensus and all member states have veto power, whilst this is not the case in supranational
institutions. This leads to to differences in their ability to make effective, swift decisions.
Intergovernmental Approaches
Intergovernmental regional institutions require unanimity for decision-making, ensuring that all
member states have an equal voice and can veto initiatives they oppose. This safeguards
sovereignty but can lead to delays and inefficiency when members have conflicting priorities.
For example, the Arab Leagueʼs reliance on unanimity has often hindered its ability to take
decisive action, as seen during the Syrian Civil War when divisions between members like
Saudi Arabia, which supported opposition groups, and Algeria, which backed the Assad
regime, prevented a unified and effective response to an important regional crisis.
Supranationalism
By contrast, supranational institutions often employ mechanisms like Qualified Majority Voting,
which allow a supermajority of member states to make a decision even if a small minority
disagree. This allows for efficient decision-making and progress on issues even when some
member states disagree.
For example, in the EU QMV is used in areas including trade, immigration and competition
policy, where decisions can be passed if a majority of member states, representing at least
65% of the EU population, agree.
For example, in 2015, under Qualified Majority Voting QMV, the European Union mandated
refugee relocation quotas, requiring countries like Hungary, Poland, and the Czech Republic
to accept refugees despite their objections.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final difference between supranational and intergovernmental approaches to regionalism is
that institutions based on supranational governance often include integration in multiple areas
of policy, whilst intergovernmental approaches largely focused on economic regionalism.
Supranationalism
Supranational regional organisations are able to effectively pursue broad integration,
cooperating on economic, political, and security issues.Examine The Differences Between Supranational and Intergovernmental Approaches To Regionalism. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
This strengthens organisationsʼ ability to have global influence but requires significant
compromises from member states, as they must align policies in areas such as defence and
foreign policy, which can be controversial domestically and have far less obvious benefits
than economic cooperation.
For example, the EU is integrated deeply across trade, environmental standards, foreign
policy and other areas. This has enabled it to adopt a unified position on major global
issues, such as climate change, where the EU leads globally through the Green Deal,
It has also improved its position in international trade and foreign policy, where it negotiates
as a single bloc with global powers like the United States and China.
Intergovernmental Approaches
On the other hand, intergovernmental regionalism is often far more narrowly focused on
economic cooperation, as this has clear mutual benefits for countries that may disagree on
security and foreign policy, therefore preventing deeper supranational integration.
For example, ASEAN has significant economic integration through the ASEAN Free Trade
Area AFTA and its negotiation of trade agreements with external powers like China and
Japan. However, its central principle of non interference in domestic affairs means there
has been little progress to supranationalism or political/security integration.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between Supranational and Intergovernmental Approaches To Regionalism. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
