Examine The Differences Between Hyperglobalisers and Globalisation Sceptics. (12) Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 1. The State and Globalisation
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
Perhaps the most important difference between hyperglobalisers and globalisation sceptics is
in relation to the role of the nation-state.
Hyperglobalisers
Hyperglobalisers believe that technological advancements, the expansion of global markets,
and the growing influence of multinational corporations MNCs) are leading to the decline of the
nation-state as the dominant actor in the global order.
They believe that international governmental organisations IGOs) and supranational
organisations are increasingly important in the context of global challenges and that they
have taken economic and political control away from nation-states.
For example, member states have ceded control over important areas of policy such as
immigration, trade and monetary policy the European Union.
Globalisation ScepticsExamine The Differences Between Hyperglobalisers and Globalisation Sceptics. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
By contrast, globalisation sceptics believe that the decline of the nation-state is overstated and
that they continue to be the most important and powerful actor in the global order.
For them, IGOs such as the World Trade Organisation WTO and United Nations have little
real power in themselves and donʼt limit the sovereignty of states. Instead, they are simply
forums for powerful countries to advance their own interests.
For instance, despite both China and the United States being members of the WTO and
signing up to its rules on free trade, when it was in their interests to do so, they both ignored
these rules and imposed tariffs on each other in January 2018.
For globalisation sceptics, this demonstrates that IGOs have little real power and that
nation-states maintain control over economic policy.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another key difference is that hyperglobalisers see globalisation as a transformative and
inevitable force reshaping global politics and economics, whilst globalisation sceptics see
globalisation as greatly overstated and not a new phenomenon.
Hyperglobalisers
Hyperglobalisers view the globalisation of the past few decades as an unprecedented shift that
has fundamentally reshaped global economics, politics, and culture. The world is now more
connected than it has ever been and actions in one part of the world have ripple effects across
the globe.
For example, in the 2008 Financial Crisis the collapse of the US housing market triggered a
global economic crisis that led to recessions and the consequent rise of populism across
the world, including in Europe and Asia.
Globalisation Sceptics
Globalisation sceptics disagree and argue that the concept of globalisation is not new or
transformative. Instead, it is a continuation of long-standing patterns of international trade and
interaction that have been present for centuries.
Politics and economics has always been influenced by events in other countries, however
decisions and events within countries continue to be the most important.
Globalisation sceptics would argue that the 2008 Financial Crisis isnʼt an anomaly, but just one
more economic crisis that have occurred throughout the history of capitalism, including the
Great Depression in the 1920s and 1930s.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final difference between hyperglobalisers and globalisation sceptics is in relation to
sovereignty and borders.
Hyperglobalisers
Hyperglobalisers argue that globalisation has significantly diminished nation-statesʼ sovereignty
and control over their borders.Examine The Differences Between Hyperglobalisers and Globalisation Sceptics. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
They believe that multinational corporations MNCs) and global trade networks have limited
the ability of governments to control their national economies and labour markets, which are
very dependent on how MNCs decide to structure their supply chains.
Similarly, they argue that increased globalisation has removed state control over their
borders. Globalisation has significantly increased both legal and illegal migration, whilst
supranational organisations have encouraged states to cede control over their borders,
such as the European Unionʼs Schengen Agreement which allows for the free movement of
people across member states.
Globalisation Sceptics
By contrast, globalisation sceptics believe that sovereignty and borders remain intact and under
the control of nation-states, even in a globalised world. They argue that nation-states can and
do enforce strict border controls and maintain sovereignty over key areas like immigration and
trade.
Australiaʼs Operation Sovereign Borders policy demonstrates a countryʼs ability to enforce
its border policies strictly, limiting asylum seeker arrivals through detention centres and
deportation programs.
Brexit also demonstrates how any loss of sovereignty over trade and border policy to
supranational institutions is only temporary and can be regained immediately by nation-
states, which can decide to leave international organisations.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the differences between transformationalists and globalisation sceptics. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between Hyperglobalisers and Globalisation Sceptics. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
