Examine The Factors That Drive Economic Globalisation and Cultural Globalisation. (12) Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 1. The State and Globalisation
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of comparison.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Comparison
One important driver of both economic globalisation and cultural globalisation is multinational
corporations MNCs).
Economic Globalisation
MNCs have been key drivers of economic globalisation by creating transnational supply chains
and investing heavily in foreign markets, therefore significantly increasing economic interaction
and dependence between countries. They do so as it is in their economic interests to have
lower labour costs and bigger markets to sell to.
For example, Apple has established a global supply chain by outsourcing production to China
and other countries, while also sourcing components from suppliers worldwide, including
Japan and South Korea.
Additionally, Apple has provided significant foreign direct investment FDI across the world
by having offices in Singapore, London and Munich, whilst selling its products in over 175
countries.Examine The Factors That Drive Economic Globalisation and Cultural Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
Cultural Globalisation
Similarly, MNCs have driven cultural globalisation by exporting cultural products, values, and
norms. This has led to greater cultural homogenisation across the world.
For instance, companies like McDonaldʼs and Netflix have spread Western cultural practices
across the world, including fast food consumption and the American dream and focus on
capitalism in many Hollywood movies, such as the Wolf of Wall Street.
The global availability of Netflixʼs content has led to a homogenisation of cultural
consumption worldwide and has reduced local cultural differences.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Comparison
Technological advancements in the 21st century in particular have also been central drivers of
rapid cultural and economic globalisation.
Economic Globalisation
The internet and digital technology have been vital to accelerating economic globalisation and
interaction between countries by enabling global trade, remote work, and financial transactions
to take place across borders.
For example, companies like Amazon and Temu use the internet to connect buyers and
sellers across the world, creating a seamless global marketplace.
Similarly, advancements in financial technology have enabled international financial flows,
with digital payment systems like PayPal and cryptocurrencies making cross-border
transactions more efficient than ever.
Cultural Globalisation
Technological advancements, in particular the internet and social media have also driven
cultural globalisation by allowing cultural moments and social movements to spread rapidly
across countries.
Social media platforms like TikTok have enabled the global spread of viral memes and
trends that influence culture across a number of countries.
Similarly, social media has facilitated the global spread of social movements, as seen with
Fridays for Future, a climate movement started by Greta Thunberg in Sweden that inspired
youth-led climate strikes in over 150 countries and led companies and governments in
numerous countries to commit to stronger action to tackle climate change.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Comparison
A third important factor that has driven both cultural and economic globalisation is migration.
Economic Globalisation
Migration has driven economic globalisation by facilitating the global exchange of labour and
skills, bolstering economic links between countries and the extent to which their economies are
dependent on each other.Examine The Factors That Drive Economic Globalisation and Cultural Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
For example, Filipino healthcare workers have filled critical labour shortages in Saudi
Arabia, which has helped Saudi Arabia by increasing its labour supply and helped the
Philippinesʼ economy, as workers sent remittances to their families. In total personal
remittances account for approximately 9% of the Philippinesʼ GDP.
This shows how migration has driven economic interaction and dependence.
Cultural Globalisation
Migration, though often driven by economic factors, has also driven cultural globalisation by
introducing diverse cultural traditions to host countries and therefore increasing
multiculturalism.
The global spread of Indian cuisine, from curry houses in London to food trucks in New
York, reflects the cultural impact of migration. In the United Kingdom, Indian restaurants
have become a significant part of the culinary landscape, with over 8,000 establishments
contributing approximately £5 billion annually to the economy.
Similarly, festivals like Diwali and Chinese New Year are now celebrated globally,
demonstrating how migrants foster cultural interaction and contribute to a richer
multicultural fabric in their host countries.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the factors that drive political globalisation and cultural globalisation. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Factors That Drive Economic Globalisation and Cultural Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
