Examine The Similar Reasons For The Expansion Of Regionalism In The European Union And In Other Regional Organisations. (12) Politics Explained
12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 5. Regionalism and the EU
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of similarity.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Similarity
Perhaps the most significant driver of regionalism in both the European Union and other
regional organisations has been the desire to enhance economic growth.
European Union
Economic integration has been a cornerstone of the EU since its inception, promoting free trade
and eliminating barriers to economic cooperation. The single market and customs union
facilitate the free movement of goods, services, capital, and people, boosting growth and trade
among its member states.
Trade within the EU accounts for 63% of its membersʼ total exports, and the common
currency of the Euro has reduced transaction costs, further promoting trade between
countries.Examine The Similar Reasons For The Expansion Of Regionalism In The European Union And In Other Regional Organisations. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan1
This is one of the most important reasons why many Eastern European states sought
membership of the European Union after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Since joining the EU in 2004, Poland has seen its GDP quadruple, with EU membership
facilitating significant foreign investment and trade growth, particularly with Germany,
its largest trading partner.
Other Regional Organisations
Promoting economic growth through free trade and cooperation is also the central driver of
regionalism in ASEAN and the Arab League, where economic integration is far more advanced
that political or security integration.
ASEAN has significant economic integration through the ASEAN Free Trade Area AFTA
and its negotiation of trade agreements with external powers like China and Japan. In 2022,
the value of intra-ASEAN trade reached over $800 billion due to tariffs being lowered to
zero for almost all goods.
The Greater Arab Free Trade Area GAFTA of the Arab League was agreed in 1997 and has
also significantly increased intra-Arab trade. For example, Jordanʼs exports to other Arab
League members have increased by over 300%
Paragraph Two
Point Of Similarity
Another important driver of regionalism in both Europe and across the world has been the
promotion of peace and regional stability.
European Union
Preventing war was a foundational goal of the EU, which sought to prevent another bloody war
on the continent. The EU began with the European Coal and Steel Community ECSC, which
made conflict between France and Germany economically unfeasible by managing key war
resources collectively.
This alliance expanded into broader political cooperation and the European Union, which
was then formalised in the Maastricht Treaty.
Today, there is also some cooperation on security issues through the EUʼs Common Foreign
and Security Policy CFSP, which seeks to ensure that member states align their foreign
policies to promote stability both within and beyond Europe. This was seen when EU
member states all placed economic sanctions on Russia after its invasion of Ukraine.
Other Regional Organisations
Maintaining peace and stability is also an important reason for the expansion of other regional
organisations, particularly the African Union AU.
The African Unionʼs Peace and Security Council pools the resources of its member states and
plays an active role in addressing conflict and maintaining stability on the African continent. It
does so through mediation and conflict prevention, but also through active peacekeeping
missions when necessary.
For example, it led the African Union Mission in Somalia AMISOM in 2007, a peacekeeping
operation that played a crucial role in stabilising Somalia and countering the threat of Al-
Shabaab.Examine The Similar Reasons For The Expansion Of Regionalism In The European Union And In Other Regional Organisations. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan2
AMISOM involved troops from Ethiopia, Kenya and other states entering Somalia to protect
civilians in key areas, train Somali forces and enable humanitarian assistance.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Similarity
A final similar reason for the expansion of regionalism in the European Union and other regional
organisation has been to promote the interests of smaller countries and regions in the context
of globalisation and great power competition between the United States and China.
European Union
Many of the EUʼs 27 member states are small states with limited economic or geopolitical
influence alone. Without membership of the European Union, they would be at risk of
exploitation by bigger powers such as the U.S. and China in trade negotiations.
However, by being a member of the EU, they are able to access larger markets and have
greater protection in trade negotiations, as the EU together is the worldʼs largest trading
bloc.
For example, Ireland, a relatively small economy, has significantly benefited from EU
membership by gaining access to the single market, which accounts for over 85% of its
trade. Through collective EU trade negotiations, Ireland has also secured favourable
agreements with major economies like Japan and Canada, which it wouldnʼt have had the
economic leverage to secure alone.
Other Regional Organisations
This has also driven regionalism in other parts of the world, particularly in regions of the world
that have historically been exploited by empires and Western countries.
ASEAN is particularly important for its member states, as the location of its member states
mean that they could otherwise be exploited by the United States/China in the context of
their global competition.
By coming together, ASEAN has been able to promote their economic interests through
negotiating favourable trade deals with major powers, including the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership RCEP which includes China, Australia and
Japan.
Similarly, the African Union was established to promote unity among African states and
defend its interests against external powers that had exploited the continent for its
resources and labour for centuries.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the ways in which regionalism interacts with globalisation. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/Examine The Similar Reasons For The Expansion Of Regionalism In The European Union And In Other Regional Organisations. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan3
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Similar Reasons For The Expansion Of Regionalism In The European Union And In Other Regional Organisations. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan4
