Examine The Differences Between Democratic and Autocratic States In Terms Of Their Characteristics and The Consequences For Global Peace and Order. (12) Politics Explained 12 Marker
Plan
Topic ➡ 4. Power and Developments
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
An important difference between democratic states and autocratic states is how much power is
centralised and how transparent decision-making and who holds power is.
Democratic States
Democratic states decentralise power across branches of government and civil society,
ensuring transparency and accountability through checks and balances and the rule of law.
Leaders are elected, and institutions like a free media, independent legislature and independent
judiciaries ensure decisions are scrutinised.
For example, the United States operates on a federal system with distinct executive,
legislative, and judicial branches that check each other to ensure no one become tooExamine The Differences Between Democratic and Autocratic States In Terms Of Their Characteristics and The Consequences For Global Peace and
Order. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
powerful. Elections, such as the 2024 Presidential election, ensure peaceful and stable
power transitions even during political tensions.
Autocratic States
By contrast, autocratic states centralise power in the hands of a single leader or ruling elite, and
often curb dissent through repression. Institutions like the judiciary and media are subordinated
to the regime, resulting in opaque decision making and a lack of accountability.
For instance, under Xi Jinping, China has consolidated power through the Chinese
Communist Party, where dissent is suppressed through strict censorship, arrests, and
surveillance. This lack of transparency can undermine trust and create both domestic and
international tensions.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another important difference is that autocratic states are far more likely to engage in conflict,
whilst democracies very rarely go to war with each other.
Democratic States
According to democratic peace theory, democracies are far less likely to go to war with each
other than autocratic states, as a consequence of institutional checks, transparent decision
making and shared values that discourage conflict.
For example, NATO, an alliance of democratic states, has avoided internal wars between its
members since its creation in 1949, demonstrating the stability democracies bring to
international relations. This peace has persisted despite economic and political
disagreements and competition between NATO member states.
Autocratic States
On the other hand, autocratic states often pursue aggressive foreign policies and war as
leaders face fewer domestic constraints. Leader are therefore able to use military action to
distract from internal issues or assert dominance without checks on executive power.
Russiaʼs invasion of Ukraine in 2022 shows this, as Vladimir Putinʼs regime bypassed
international norms and democratic oversight, escalating a major conflict that destabilised
the global order without needing to take into account whether there was public support for
conscription and war.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final difference between autocratic and democratic states is that the former are far more likely
to lead to internal conflict, civil war and regional instability as a consequence.
Autocratic States
Autocratic regimes often create the conditions for internal unrest due to oppressive
governance, lack of representation, and restrictions on freedoms. These factors can escalate
into civil wars or insurgencies when populations revolt against authoritarian rule and therefore
create significant regional instability.Examine The Differences Between Democratic and Autocratic States In Terms Of Their Characteristics and The Consequences For Global Peace and
Order. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
For example, Bashar al-Assadʼs violent crackdowns on peaceful protests led to over a
decade of civil war in Syria from 2011, in which over 500,000 people died and Assad was
eventually forced out of power in December 2024.
The war not only destabilised Syria but also had regional and global repercussions, with
millions displaced and neighbouring countries overwhelmed by refugees.
Democratic States
By contrast, democratic states are less likely to face large-scale internal conflict because their
judicial systems provide a peaceful means for resolving disputes, whilst election provide a
peaceful means for changing who is in power. Political opposition and anger is therefore
channelled into legitimate democratic processes rather than leading to oppression and
violence.
For instance, while the United States faced significant political divisions during the 2020
presidential election and its aftermath, democratic institutions like the judiciary and
Congress helped maintain order and prevent widespread violence.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the differences between semi-democratic and failed states in terms of their
characteristics and the consequences for global peace and order. 12
Examine the differences between failed states and rogue states in terms of their characteristics
and the consequences for global peace and order. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between Democratic and Autocratic States In Terms Of Their Characteristics and The Consequences For Global Peace and
Order. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
