Examine The Similarities Between Economic Globalisation and Cultural Globalisation. (12) Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 1. The State and Globalisation
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of similarity.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Similarity
One key similarity between economic globalisation and cultural globalisation is that the internet
and multinational corporations MNCs) have been key drivers of them in 21st century in
particular, when the interconnectedness of economies and cultures has rapidly increased.
Economic Globalisation
MNCs have been key drivers of economic globalisation by creating transnational supply chains
and investing heavily in foreign markets, therefore significantly increasing economic interaction
and dependence between countries. They do so as it is in their economic interests to have
lower labour costs and bigger markets to sell to.
For example, Apple has established a global supply chain by outsourcing production to
China and other countries, while also sourcing components from suppliers worldwide,
including Japan and South Korea.
The internet and technology have also driven economic globalisation by enabling global trade,
remote work, and financial transactions to take place across borders.Examine The Similarities Between Economic Globalisation and Cultural Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
For example, companies like Amazon and Temu use the internet to connect buyers and
sellers across the world, creating a seamless global marketplace.
Cultural Globalisation
MNCs have also driven cultural globalisation by exporting cultural products, values, and norms.
This has led to greater cultural homogenisation across the world.
For instance, companies like McDonaldʼs and Netflix have spread Western cultural practices
across the world, including fast food consumption and the American dream and focus on
capitalism in many Hollywood movies, such as the Wolf of Wall Street.
This has been facilitated by the internet and social media, which have allowed media to be
shared across the world, as seen in the global spread of viral memes and trends that influence
culture across a number of countries.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Similarity
Another important similarity is that both cultural and economic globalisation have eroded the
importance of borders and made countries far more interdependent.
Economic Globalisation
Economic globalisation has made national borders more open through free trade agreements
and economic incentives to reduce tariffs and take advantage of global trade, which has led to
greater interdependence among countries.
The growth of global trade and MNCs means that supply chains now span across different
countries and rely on seamless movement across borders.
For example, Appleʼs supply chains sources components from suppliers worldwide,
including Japan and South Korea, has the majority of its production in China and
finishes most of its products in the United States.
This has meant that events in one country can have a major impact on economies across
the world and has reduced the extent to which national governments can control their own
economies, as they are dependent on the investment of MNCs, which have significant
power.
Cultural Globalisation
Cultural globalisation has also eroded the importance of borders, as it has encouraged cultural
practices, traditions and norms to spread across nations. This has been driven by migration and
has increased multiculturalism.
For example, festivals like Diwali and Chinese New Year are now celebrated globally,
demonstrating how migrants foster cultural interaction and reduced the extent to which
culture is constrained by borders.
Cultural globalisation has also made countries more interdependent by allowing social
movements to spread across countries, facilitated by social media.
For example, Fridays for Future was a climate movement started by Greta Thunberg in
Sweden that inspired youth-led climate strikes in over 150 countries and led companies and
governments in numerous countries to commit to stronger action to tackle climate change.Examine The Similarities Between Economic Globalisation and Cultural Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
Paragraph Three
Point Of Similarity
A final important similarity between economic and cultural globalisation is that both have
eroded the agency and power of local actors in poorer countries especially, as powerful states
and their corporations are able to dominate.
Economic Globalisation
Economic globalisation and global trade has led to MNCs, which are often American/European,
to dominate global markets across a range of sectors. This has limited the economic
development of weaker economies and left them dependent on foreign investment and the
export of raw materials.
For example, Sub-Saharan Africa has remained heavily dependent on foreign investment
and the export of raw materials like oil and minerals, as multinational corporations dominate
resource extraction and attempts to use state action to develop other economic sectors
such as manufacturing are discouraged by the international community for disrupting free
trade.
In the Democratic Republic of Congo DRC, for example, over 70% of the population lives
on less than $2.15 a day, while international mining companies profit from its rich cobalt and
copper reserves.
Cultural Globalisation
Similarly, cultural globalisation has diminished local cultural identities in developing nations, as
global media and MNCs promote a homogenised Western culture. This has led to the erosion of
indigenous traditions and practices in particular.
The spread of fast food chains like McDonaldʼs and Hollywood movies has led to a dilution
of traditional culinary practices and local entertainment industries, which are unable to
compete.
Further, as global media conglomerates have gained influence, local artists have lost some
control over how their culture is represented. Cultural narratives and traditions are increasingly
shaped by global media corporations rather than by local communities themselves, resulting in
misrepresentation and cultural dilution.
For example, Disney films Pocahontas and Moana have been criticised for misrepresenting
indigenous cultures, commercialising their traditions for global audiences while
oversimplifying their histories and beliefs.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the differences between economic globalisation and cultural globalisation. 12
Examine the similarities between political globalisation and cultural globalisation. 12
Examine the ways that economic and cultural globalisation impact the developing world. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/Examine The Similarities Between Economic Globalisation and Cultural Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Similarities Between Economic Globalisation and Cultural Globalisation. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan4
