Examine The Differences Between The African Union and The European Union.
(12) Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 5. Regionalism and the EU
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
One important difference between the African Union and the European Union is that the former
is a primarily intergovernmental regional organisation, whilst the latter combines supranational
and intergovernmental institutions.
African Union
The AU is an intergovernmental regional organisation, which ensures it maintains member
statesʼ sovereignty. Decisions are made through consensus, ensuring that no state is forced to
adopt policies against its will, as any member state can veto decisions that are against its
national interest.
For example, during the 2011 Libyan Civil War, AU member states like South Africa and
Uganda opposed NATOʼs intervention, while others, including Nigeria, supported it. This
division and the AUʼs consensus-based approach meant that the organisation didnʼt take
any action/stance.
European Union
By contrast, the EU has a number of supranational institutions, including the European
Commission, European Central Bank and the European Court of Justice, which have theExamine The Differences Between The African Union and The European Union. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
authority to enforce binding decisions on member states. This means that member states donʼt
retain full sovereignty.
For example, the European Commission took action against Poland in 2021 over its
continued operation of the Turów coal mine, which violated EU environmental laws.
Despite Polandʼs resistance, the EU imposed financial penalties, demonstrating the
supranational authority of its institutions to enforce compliance and how member states
have ceded sovereignty over environmental law.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another difference between the European Union and African Union is the extent of economic
integration.
African Union
The African Union has set up the African Continental Free Trade Area AfCFTA, with the aim of
creating a single market for goods and services across 54 member states, boosting intra-
African trade by reducing tariffs and trade barriers. It therefore, has a certain level of economic
integration.
However, member states still retain complete control over their monetary and fiscal policies,
which limits Africaʼs ability to act as a unified body.
Further, AfCFTA is projected to increase intra-African trade by 52%, but trade remains
constrained by non-tariff barriers and weak infrastructure. This means that trade is still far
less free and economies are far less interdependent than in the European Unionʼs single
market.
European Union
The EU has far greater economic integration among its member states. It has established a
single market, customs union, and a shared currency among 20 member states, which allows
for the free movement of goods, services, capital, and people across the continent.
Under the Eurozone, 20 EU countries have pooled their monetary policy and ceded
significant control to the European Central Bank.
The common currency of the Euro, along with the single market and customs union, makes
cross-border trade seamless and has significant economic benefits. They facilitate trade
worth over €3.4 trillion annually among EU member states.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final noticeable difference between the European Union and the African Union is that the AU
has more active security cooperation within its own continent.
African Union
The African Unionʼs Peace and Security Council pools the resources of its member states and
plays an active role in addressing conflict and maintaining stability on the African continent. ItExamine The Differences Between The African Union and The European Union. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
does so through mediation and conflict prevention, but also through active peacekeeping
missions when necessary.
For example, it led the African Union Mission in Somalia AMISOM in 2007, a peacekeeping
operation that played a crucial role in stabilising Somalia and countering the threat of Al-
Shabaab.
AMISOM involved troops from Ethiopia, Kenya and other states entering Somalia to protect
civilians in key areas, train Somali forces and enable humanitarian assistance.
European Union
Despite being a more deeply integrated regional organisation, the European Union has limited
security integration and hasnʼt taken on peacekeeping missions in Europe in the same way. This
is largely because it lacks an independent military force and NATO is the organisation through
which European states cooperate on security issues.
The EU does have a Common Security and Defence Policy CSDP, but it has largely
focused on limited missions abroad, such as Operation Atalanta to combat piracy off the
coast of Somalia.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the similarities between the African Union and European Union. 12
Examine the differences between the Arab League and the European Union. 12
Examine the differences between the ASEAN and the African Union. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between The African Union and The European Union. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
