Examine The Similarities In The Role and Effectiveness Of The G7 and The Role and Effectiveness Of The G20. (12) Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 2. Global Governance: Political and Economic
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of similarity.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Similarity
An important similarity between the role of the G7 and G20 is that both play a central role in
coordinating a global response to major economic crises, as they allow cooperation and
negotiation between those with real political power.
The G7
The G7 has frequently played a central role in responding to global economic crises, as it is able
to coordinate a response from the worldʼs largest and most advanced Western economies that
share an interest in global economic stability and support capitalism.
As the leaders themselves attend annual G7 summits, highly significant decisions can be
made by those with real power in the global economy.
For example, the 2021 G7 Summit in Cornwall was key to coordinating the economic and
public health response to the COVID19 pandemic, including a commitment to deliver at
least 1 billion vaccine doses to poorer countries.
The G20Examine The Similarities In The Role and Effectiveness Of The G7 and The Role and Effectiveness Of The G20. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
The G20 has played a similarly important role in responding to global economic crises and
maintaining stability, especially as non-Western states including China and India are growing in
power in the global economy, which means they must be included in any crisis responses.
The G20 played a central role in the response to the 2008 global financial crisis, which
elevated its role in global economic governance. At the Washington Summit in November
2008, G20 leaders coordinated a global response. Their agreed $5 trillion in stimulus
packages prevented further economic collapse and delivered economic stability.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Similarity
Both the G7 and G20 are limited in their effectiveness as they are informal organisations that
rely on informal agreements rather than binding commitments. As their decisions arenʼt
enforceable, their ability to implement long-term solutions to global challenges is often limited.
The G7
The G7 has frequently been criticised for making financial commitments that it fails to deliver
on, particularly in areas like climate change and global inequality where it has failed to fulfil
commitments to help poorer nations that are more negatively affected.
For example, the G7 pledged in 2009 to mobilise $100 billion annually by 2020 to help
developing countries address climate change impacts and repeated this commitment at
subsequent summits, yet it failed to meet the commitment on time, with only $83 billion
raised in 2020.
The G20
The G20 has also also been criticised for making agreements at its annual meetings that arenʼt
met as member states often prioritise their national interests. This is an even greater problem
for the G20 than the G7 due to the diverse and contradicting national interests of member
states.
For example, at the 2021 Rome Summit, G20 leaders agreed to work toward global net-zero
emissions by mid-century, but this vague and non-binding commitment meant that follow-
through has been inconsistent, with countries like India and China resisting firm
commitments to phase out coal.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Similarity
A final similarity between the roles of the G7 and G20 is that they both serve as forums for the
worldʼs wealthiest states to make decisions that serve their interests, rather than including and
serving developing states as well.
The G7
The G7ʼs exclusivity, comprising only seven of the worldʼs most industrialised countries, means
that its decisions often reflect the priorities of its members rather than those of the majority of
countries, which are often contradictory. This undermines its legitimacy as a forum for
addressing global challenges.Examine The Similarities In The Role and Effectiveness Of The G7 and The Role and Effectiveness Of The G20. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
For instance, its Build Back Better World B3W initiative has been criticised for prioritising
strategic competition with Chinaʼs Belt and Road Initiative rather than genuinely addressing
the development needs of poorer nations.
The G20
Although more inclusive than the G7, the G20 has also faced criticism for its limited
representation of smaller and poorer nations. With only 20 members, it excludes over 80% of
the worldʼs countries, raising questions about the legitimacy of its decisions.
The G20ʼs Debt Service Suspension Initiative DSSI during the COVID19 pandemic
provided temporary relief for developing countries but was criticised for being insufficient
to address the deeper structural issues of debt in poorer nations, demonstrating how the
lack of representation leads to failed policies.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the differences in the role and effectiveness of the G7 and the role and effectiveness
of the G20. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Similarities In The Role and Effectiveness Of The G7 and The Role and Effectiveness Of The G20. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
