Examine The Similarities Between The Role and Significance of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and The Role and Significance of The International Monetary Fund (IMF). (12)
Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 2. Global Governance: Political and Economic
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of similarity.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Similarity
An important similarity between the IMF and WTO is that that they both seek to promote global
economic stability and growth.
The International Monetary Fund IMF
The IMF was established to rebuild and bring stability to the global economy following WWII
and to prevent economic crises similar to the Great Depression and maintaining economic
stability remains its central aim today.
It does so primarily by lending money to countries facing balance of payments problems
and by monitoring national economies in order to prevent economic crises that could have a
global impact.Examine The Similarities Between The Role and Significance of the World Trade Organisation WTO and The Role and Significance of The International
Monetary Fund IMF. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
For example, when Greece faced a severe debt crisis in 2010 and was on the verge of default,
the IMF worked with the EU to provide a bailout package worth approximately €289 billion. This
prevented Greece from defaulting and the chaos this couldʼve caused for the European and
global economy.
The World Trade Organisation WTO
The WTO also aims to promote economic stability and growth, by ensuring that global trade
flows as predictably and freely as possible. It does so by facilitating trade negotiations so that
countries reduce tariffs.
For example, the Bali Trade Facilitation Agreement 2013 simplified global customs
procedures, reducing trade costs by an estimated 14.3% on average, which directly boosted
global trade and economic growth.
It also does so by settling disputes between countries to prevent destabilising trade wars,
through the WTOʼs Dispute Settlement Body DSB.
For example, in 2004, the DSB ruled that the United States had violated WTO agreements by
providing illegal subsidies to its cotton farmers, which harmed Brazilian farmers. As a result,
the U.S. agreed to pay $300 million in compensation to Brazil and reform its agricultural
policies.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Similarity
Another similarity between the IMF and WTO is that both organisations have been criticised for
being dominated by wealthier nations and primarily serving their interests, despite having global
mandates.
The International Monetary Fund IMF
In the IMF, voting power is heavily skewed toward developed Western economies, with the
United States holding over 16% of the votes, effectively granting it veto power over major
decisions that require an 85% majority.
This dominance has allowed the U.S. to shape IMF policies to align with its own economic and
geopolitical interests, despite the fact the IMF is supposed to support smaller countries and the
global economy as a whole.
For example, during the Asian Financial Crisis in the late 1990s, IMF policies heavily
prioritised U.S. banking interests, imposing stringent conditions that exacerbated the crisis
in countries like Indonesia and Thailand.
The World Trade Organisation WTO
While the WTO technically operates on a “one country, one voteˮ principle, in practice wealthier
nations are also able to exert disproportionate influence, particularly in trade negotiations
where developing countries lack the resources and negotiating power to have their voices and
interests heard.
For example, the Doha Development Round failed to reach a trade agreement as developed
countries pushed for greater access to developing markets, whilst also refusing to cut
agricultural subsidies that give their farmers an unfair advantage over farmers in poorer
nations.Examine The Similarities Between The Role and Significance of the World Trade Organisation WTO and The Role and Significance of The International
Monetary Fund IMF. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
Paragraph Three
Point Of Similarity
A final similarity between the IMF and WTO is that both organisations aim to promote the
development of poorer countries, through both capacity building programmes and integration
into the global economy.
The International Monetary Fund IMF
The IMF helps member countries strengthen their economic institutions and development
through technical assistance and training, providing expertise in areas such as tax policy, public
expenditure and monetary policy.
This is particularly important for some low-income and developing countries, where
institutions arenʼt as well established.
For example, in the early 2000s the IMF provided technical assistance to improve
Cambodiaʼs monetary policy framework and banking regulations. By enhancing the
capabilities of the National Bank of Cambodia, the IMF helped the country stabilise its
banking sector, manage inflation more effectively, and sustain its economic growth.
The World Trade Organisation WTO
The WTO also seeks to promote the development of poorer countries by integrating them into
the global economy and allowing them to export across the world.
The clearest example of this is China, which joined the WTO in 2001. This led to unprecedented
economic growth and China becoming the worldʼs leading exporter, due to the greater market
access it gained through reduced tariffs.
Between 2001 and 2025, Chinaʼs GDP grew from approximately $1.3 trillion to $19.23 trillion,
making it the second-largest economy in the world.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the differences between the role and significance of the World Trade Organisation
WTO and the role and significance of the International Monetary Fund IMF. 12
Examine the limitations of both the World Trade Organisation WTO and the International
Monetary Fund IMF. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Similarities Between The Role and Significance of the World Trade Organisation WTO and The Role and Significance of The International
Monetary Fund IMF. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
