Examine The Differences Between The Nature Of The Current World Order and The Nature Of The World Order In 2000. (12) Politics Explained 12 Marker
Plan
Topic ➡ 4. Power and Developments
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
The clearest difference between the current world order and the world order in 2000 is how
China has risen to prominence in military, economic and geopolitical terms, leading to many
commentators considering it a superpower.
The World Order In 2000
In 2000, the United States was the undisputed hegemon in a unipolar world order. Its GDP was
the largest in the world at $10 trillion and it had by far the biggest and most capable military in
the world, with the U.S. representing 37% of global military spending.
China was still emerging economically with a GDP of $1.2 trillion and was focused on quietly
growing in economic power under Deng Xiaopingʼs philosophy of “hide your strength, bide
your time.ˮExamine The Differences Between The Nature Of The Current World Order and The Nature Of The World Order In 2000. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan1
It had yet to translate much of its growing economic power into its military, which was
regionally focused and had limited global reach.
The Current World Order
Today, by contrast, China is far more powerful and is considered by many to now be a
superpower and a real threat to the United Statesʼ hegemony. Its GDP today exceeds $19
trillion, making it close behind the U.S.ʼs $28 trillion GDP as the worldʼs second-largest
economy.
It has also become more assertive in global politics. It has modernised its military and began
to assert itself regionally, including by building artificial islands in the South China Sea.
Further, it has grown its geopolitical and soft power influence through the Belt and Road
Initiative, under which it has funded infrastructure projects in over 100 countries as part of
an intentional strategy to grow its influence over other countries and challenge U.S.
dominance.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another important difference is the shift from a unipolar world order dominated by the United
States to a more multipolar world order that has an alliance of countries that aim to dislodge the
United Statesʼ supremacy.
The World Order In 2000
In 2000, the unipolar dominance of the United States was clear. It was by far the worldʼs most
powerful economy and military power, which enabled it to shape the international order in its
image and act as the global police force to enforce global rules.
U.S. dominance in the 1990s and early 2000s led to a significant number of U.S.-led
humanitarian interventions to uphold human rights, maintain peace and serve American
interests, including in Somalia, Kosovo and Afghanistan.
The Current World Order
By contrast, the world order today is far more multipolar and competitive, with a number of
powers aligning and working together to dislodge American dominance.
Since 2000, countries including China, Russia and Iran have grown in power and in recent years
they have began to cooperate, economically and militarily to exert influence globally and
challenge U.S. interests.
For example, Iranian-built drones are being used by Russia in Ukraine and both Russia and
Iran now export a significant majority of their energy reserves to China, therefore
supporting its continued economic growth and a manufacturing superpower.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final key difference between the current world order and the world order in 2000 is the
decline of liberal ideals such as free markets, the rule of law and democracy and the
consequent decreased influence of liberal international institutions.Examine The Differences Between The Nature Of The Current World Order and The Nature Of The World Order In 2000. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan2
The World Order In 2000
In 2000, liberalism dominated global governance. International governmental organisation
including the United Nations, IMF, and World Bank reinforced democratic values, human rights,
and open markets under U.S. leadership.
The United Nations promoted liberal democratic governance and human rights through
peacekeeping missions and humanitarian interventions, such as in Somalia, East Timor and
Sierra Leone.
The World Trade Organisation WTO also promoted liberal values by encouraging countries
to have open markets and respect free trade.
The Current World Order
Today, by contrast, it is clear that liberal ideals have far less influence across the world.
Populism and isolationism have grown in Western countries including the United States,
Turkey and Hungary, which has challenged the rule of law, democracy and free markets.
For example, in Trumpʼs first term he sought to overturn the results of a legitimate
election, undermined the courts and started a trade war with China.
At the same time, China and Russia have grown in power and challenged the liberal
international order, including by opposing international action against allies that have
committed human rights violations, as seen in Russiaʼs use of its UN Security Council veto
to prevent action against Assad in Syria.
Moreover, China has sought to export its model of state-led development and
authoritarian governance through the Belt and Road Initiative.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the similarities between the nature of the current world order and the nature of the
world order in 2000. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between The Nature Of The Current World Order and The Nature Of The World Order In 2000. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan3
