Examine The Differences Between The Role And Significance Of The United Nations And The Role And Significance Of NATO. (12) Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 2. Global Governance: Political and Economic
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
One important difference between the roles and significance of NATO and the United Nations is
that NATO has clear enforcement powers and military capabilities, while the UN relies on
voluntary cooperation from its members after security council resolutions, which it is often
unable to secure.
NATO
NATO is a military alliance with clear enforcement powers when necessary. Its collective
defence mechanism under article 5 commits member states to respond collectively to an armed
attack on any member, whilst its military command structure and permanent secretary general
means it is always ready to attack.
For example, in 1999 NATO forces intervened militarily in Kosovo without explicit UN
authorisation. The intervention, prompted by escalating ethnic violence and theExamine The Differences Between The Role And Significance Of The United Nations And The Role And Significance Of NATO. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan1
displacement of over 1.5 million Albanians by Serbian forces, involved an 11-week bombing
campaign that successfully stopped atrocities and compelled Serbian forces to withdraw.
The United Nations
By contrast, the UNʼs reliance on voluntary cooperation means it struggles to enforce
resolutions, even when human rights and peace are at risk. Security Council actions require
consensus among the P5 members, who often use their veto power to block action against
themselves or their allies.
For instance, Russia and China repeatedly vetoed resolutions to intervene in the Syrian Civil
War, leaving the UN unable to intervene effectively despite the grave humanitarian crisis.
The UNʼs inability to act decisively highlights how it is often unable to make or enforce
decisions, unlike NATO.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another difference between the United Nations and NATO is that the former has a much greater
scope and mandate to tackle global challenges.
The United Nations
The UNʼs broad mandate is rooted in its founding document, the Charter of the United Nations
1945, which sets out that its purpose includes roles as varied as maintaining international
peace and security, promoting human rights, fostering economic development and promoting
cooperation between states.
This expansive mandate has led to the UN playing a significant role in tackling a wide array
of global challenges. In 2015, the UN launched the Sustainable Development Goals SDGs),
focusing on poverty, education, and climate action, and facilitated the Paris Agreement in
2015 to combat global warming collectively.
At the same time, the UN has also carried out a number of peacekeeping missions, such as
those in Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
NATO
By contrast, NATOʼs scope is narrower, focusing almost exclusively on defence and security in
the Euro-Atlantic region. Its primary mission has always been to protect its members against
external security threats, particularly from Russia.
NATOʼs response to Russiaʼs invasion of Ukraine in 2022 reinforced its focus on collective
security, with member states deploying additional troops, military equipment, and resources
to bolster defenses along NATOʼs eastern borders, particularly in Poland, the Baltic states,
and Romania.
This included the activation of NATOʼs Response Force for the first time in history and the
establishment of new battlegroups in Eastern Europe to deter further Russian aggression.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final difference is that the significance of NATO is very dependent on the United Statesʼ
commitment and funding, which as the allianceʼs greatest military power has significant control.Examine The Differences Between The Role And Significance Of The United Nations And The Role And Significance Of NATO. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan2
Though the U.S. is also a significant funder of the United Nations, other countries have much
more influence and the U.S. isʼt able to dominate in the same way.
NATO
The reliance of other NATO member states on the United States is rooted in the fact that the
U.S. accounts for approximately 70% of NATOʼs defence spending. This gives the U.S.
significant influence over NATOʼs strategic direction, which was made clear in 2001 when
Article 5 was invoked for the first and only time in response to the 9/11 attacks and NATO allies
supporting U.S. operations in Afghanistan during the War on Terror.
This was despite 9/11 not being a clear attack by a state and the War on Terror to furthering
its central mission of defending against Russian aggression.
This dependence on the United States also makes NATO very vulnerable were the U.S. to
leave the alliance, as Trump threatened during his first administration.
The United Nations
Unlike NATO, the United Nationsʼ structure ensures that no single country can dominate its
structure or decision-making. Although the U.S. is the largest contributor to the UN, providing
around 22% of its regular budget, decision-making is spread across 193 member states, with
significant input from smaller nations.
For example, in the General Assembly, all countries have equal voting rights, as seen in the
overwhelming majority vote condemning the U.S. embargo on Cuba, with 185 nations voting
against it in 2022. This demonstrated the multilateral nature of the UN and the limits of U.S.
dominance within it.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the similarities between the role and significance of the United Nations and the role
and significance of NATO. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between The Role And Significance Of The United Nations And The Role And Significance Of NATO. 12 Politics Explained 12
Marker Plan3
