Examine The Role and Significance Of Non-State Actors In Tackling Both Poverty and Climate Change. (12)
Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 3. Global Governance: Human Rights and Environmental
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of comparison.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Comparison
An important similarity in the role of non-state actors in tackling poverty and climate change is
that multinational corporations MNCs) claim to have a positive impact in both, but in reality
often do far more damage than they do help as they are driven purely by the pursuit of profit.
Poverty
MNCs often exacerbate poverty through exploitative labour practices and limited reinvestment
in local economies, driven by the fact that their primary motive is short-term profit over
sustainable development.
For example, Foxconn, a major supplier for tech giants like Apple, has faced widespread
criticism for poor working conditions in its factories in countries like China, with workers
reporting excessive hours and low wages.
Furthermore, extractive industries, such as the mining industry operated by Glencore in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, often exploit local resources with minimal investment in theExamine The Role and Significance Of Non-State Actors In Tackling Both Poverty and Climate Change. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
local community. This simply exploits cheap labour and poor working conditions, before leaving
areas impoverished once operations cease.
Climate Change
This primary profit motive also leads to MNCs doing major damage to the environment, as
including in the worldʼs most deprived countries. Not only do oil and natural gas companies
damage the environment through carbon emissions, they also do so through oil spills.
For example, Royal Dutch Shell has been held accountable for extensive oil spills in the
Niger Delta, which have devastated local fishing and farming industries, destroying the
livelihoods of many communities.
MNCsʼ corporate social responsibility initiatives often claim to prioritise reducing environmental
damage, but in reality much of this is greenwashing.
BP for instance, rebranded as “Beyond Petroleumˮ but continues to invest heavily in fossil
fuels, illustrating how such initiatives can deflect scrutiny without achieving meaningful
change.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Comparison
Another similarity is that non-state actors play a central role in raising awareness about both
poverty and climate change, however there are differences in which groups have had success.
In particular, social movements have been far more prominent in climate change.
Poverty
Both non-governmental organisations NGOs) and celebrities have played a prominent role in
raising global awareness about the importance of tackling poverty and inequality, particularly
by trying to drive greater commitment from those in richer, Western countries.
For example, Bono, the lead singer of U2, has been a vocal advocate for poverty reduction
through his work with the ONE Campaign, which he co-founded to fight extreme poverty
and preventable disease, particularly in Africa.
Celebrities often work in collaboration with NGOs such as Oxfam and Save the Children, to
raise money and provide humanitarian and development aid independently of governments.
Climate Change
Non-state actors have also played an important role in raising awareness about climate change,
however the actors that have had far more success in this area are grassroots social
movements, which have mobilised million worldwide to demand urgent action from
policymakers and companies.
For example, Greta Thunbergʼs Fridays for Future movement leveraged social media and
organised public demonstrations, inspiring over 14 million participants in more than 7,500
cities across 125 countries.
This movement had an impact on policy in a number of countries, including in influencing
the German governmentʼs decision to set earlier deadlines for coal phaseout and stricter
emissions targets.
Paragraph ThreeExamine The Role and Significance Of Non-State Actors In Tackling Both Poverty and Climate Change. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
Point Of Comparison
A final way in which non-state actors tackle both climate change and poverty is that
philanthropic foundations fund large-scale work, however in both cases there are concerns
about creating dependency and reducing the capacity of local actors.
Poverty
Philanthropic foundations have invested billions in tackling poverty globally.
The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation has invested billions in initiatives such as GAVI, the
Vaccine Alliance, which has provided vaccines to more than 1 billion children in low-income
regions, whilst the Ford Foundation has sought to empower marginalised communities
through microfinance initiatives, providing access to credit for small businesses in countries
like Bangladesh and India.
There are concerns that this does more harm than good, though, as it performs functions that
state government should be doing, therefore creating a dependency and undermining local
actorsʼ capacity to tackle poverty in the long-term.
Climate Change
Many global philanthropic foundations also focus on tackling climate change.
The Bezos Earth Fund has pledged $10 billion to combat climate change by supporting
reforestation, renewable energy projects, and carbon capture technologies.
Similarly, the Rockefeller Foundation has focused on climate resilience, funding projects that
promote sustainable agriculture and clean energy access in developing countries, including
solar power initiatives in sub-Saharan Africa.
As with poverty, there are however concerns that this creates dependency and that the
initiatives are ineffective as they are driven by Western actors with little direct experience of the
effects of climate change.
For example, carbon offsetting has been criticised for a lack of transparency and the fact
that they have sometimes displaced indigenous communities to make way for reforestation
projects.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the role and significance of non-state actors in addressing human rights and conflict.
12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Role and Significance Of Non-State Actors In Tackling Both Poverty and Climate Change. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
