Examine The Differences Between Hyperglobalisers and Transformationalists. (12) Politics
Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 1. The State and Globalisation
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
One important difference between hyperglobalisers and transformationalists is that
hyperglobalisers see globalisation as a uniform, inevitable, and irreversible force fundamentally
reshaping the global order, whilst transformationalists see it as a far more complex process.
Hyperglobalisers
Hyperglobalisers view the globalisation of the past few decades as an unprecedented and
irreversible shift that has fundamentally reshaped global economics, politics, and culture. The
world is now more connected than it has ever been and no state has been able to escape the
influence of the global economy.
For example, multinational corporations MNCs) such as Apple, Amazon and Toyota
incorporate and touch every inhabited continent, both in terms of their global supply chains
and their sales.
This has transformed national economies and is here to stay.
TransformationalistsExamine The Differences Between Hyperglobalisers and Transformationalists. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
Transformationalists, by contrast, argue that globalisation is a much more complex and uneven
process. Its impacts vary greatly across regions and sectors, with some areas experiencing
profound integration while others remain relatively isolated.
Political globalisation has lagged behind economic globalisation, as national governments
have prioritised sovereignty over deeper political integration, as shown by the fact that
ASEAN, the Arab League and the African Union remain intergovernmental institutions, rather
than following the example of the European Union.
Similarly, countries like China have remained relatively isolated in terms of cultural
globalisation, as strict state controls over media and internet access limit the spread of
foreign cultural influences within its borders.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another difference between hyperglobalisers and transformationalists is the extent to which
they believe it has changed the role of the nation-state.
Hyperglobalisers
Hyperglobalisers believe that technological advancements, the expansion of global markets,
and the growing influence of MNCs have led to the decline of the nation-state as the dominant
actor in the global order.
They believe that international governmental organisations IGOs) and supranational
organisations are increasingly important in the context of global challenges and that they
have taken economic and political control away from nation-states.
For example, member states have ceded control over important areas of policy such as
immigration, trade and monetary policy the European Union.
Transformationalists
Transformationalist disagree that globalisation is simply eroding state power and argue that it is
instead transforming the role of the nation state. States must now collaborate with and work
through non-state actors including IGOs and MNCs, however they havenʼt lost their sovereign
control to these actors.
For example, in order to tackle the global challenge of climate change, nation states must
collaborate through the United Nations and international agreements like the Paris
Agreement.
They retain control over their economic and climate policy, however, as they can ultimately
decide not to sign international environmental agreements or not fulfil their commitments.
This was demonstrated by the U.S. leaving the Paris Agreement under the Trump
administration.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final key difference is that many hyperglobalisers see globalisation as a positive force that
can improve economic development for all, whilst transformationalists argue that it insteadExamine The Differences Between Hyperglobalisers and Transformationalists. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
actually creates opportunities for strong states with large economies to exert and increase their
influence.
Hyperglobalisers
Hyperglobalisers believe that globalisation has been a positive force that has fostered economic
growth and development across the globe, reducing poverty by integrating countries into global
trade networks.
They argue that it has allowed all countries to take advantage of exporting into the global
market. For example, it has led to huge reductions in poverty in both large countries such as
China and smaller countries such as Vietnam.
China has lifted over 800 million people out of poverty and Vietnam reduced its poverty rate
from 58% in 1993 to below 6% by 2019.
Transformationalists
Transformationalists disagree that globalisation has been a positive force that has benefitted all
countries equally. Instead, they argue that strong states with large economies have been able to
exploit the interconnected nature of international institutions and benefit more than weaker
states.
For example, both China and the US have used open markets to exploit Sub-Saharan
African countries, with China investing in infrastructure projects under its Belt and Road
Initiative to secure access to resources like cobalt and rare earth metals, while the US
sources critical minerals for its technology and energy industries.
Rather than globalisation leading to economic development, many Sub-Saharan African
countries remain in deep poverty as a result, heavily dependent on raw material exports,
with little progress in diversifying their economies or developing effectively.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Examine the differences between transformationalists and globalisation sceptics. 12
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between Hyperglobalisers and Transformationalists. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
