Examine The Differences Between Sustainable Development and The Tragedy Of The Commons. (12) Politics
Explained 12 Marker Plan
Topic ➡ 3. Global Governance: Human Rights and Environmental
Structure ➡ Three short paragraphs each focused on a point of difference.
This Plan Is Part Of A Package Of 12 Markers Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Government and Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here
➡ https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These plans are long and you need to work out how much of them you can write
within the timing. Some students will be able to include everything, but most will have to cut out
some of the detail/examples. You can still get full marks even when doing so.
Paragraph One
Point Of Difference
Perhaps the most important difference between the tragedy of the commons and sustainable
development is whether they believe that the international community can come together to
tackle climate change effectively.
The Tragedy Of The Commons
The tragedy of the commons theory suggests that the international community is unlikely to
come together effectively to tackle climate change, as the self-interest of individual countries
will prevail and prevent collective action.
This theory is rooted in the idea that shared resources, including the atmosphere and
planet, are overexploited because all states prioritise their short-term economic interests
rather than the global good, which no one state has a big enough direct incentive to
address.
This can be seen in the fact that fossil fuel-dependent countries like Saudi Arabia and Russia
have resisted international agreements to reduce carbon emissions, fearing economic lossesExamine The Differences Between Sustainable Development and The Tragedy Of The Commons. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan1
from transitioning towards renewable forms of energy.
Sustainable Development
By contrast, sustainable development is based on the belief that collective action and effective
international cooperation are achievable and necessary to tackle climate change, by balancing
economic growth with environmental protection.
This can be seen in the European Unionʼs approach and success in tackling climate change.
The EU has committed to achieving net-zero emissions by 2050 and has introduced an
Emissions Trading System ETS; a market-based approach that has successfully reduced
emissions from power and industrial sectors by over 40% since 2005, showing that
economic growth and environmental protection can be balanced.
Paragraph Two
Point Of Difference
Another key difference is that the tragedy of the commons theory believes that the pursuit of
economic growth under capitalism will prevent effective action to tackle climate change, whilst
sustainable development believes that countries can develop economically without destroying
the planet.
The Tragedy Of The Commons
Proponents of the tragedy of the commons theory argue that economic growth inevitably leads
to overconsumption and environmental degradation, as states exploit natural resources for their
own benefit.
As a result, they argue that without strict limits on resource use and a significant change to
how global capitalism operates, efforts to tackle climate change wonʼt succeed, as
overconsumption and environmental damage is inherent to global capitalism.
Sustainable Development
Those who advocate for sustainable development disagree and argue not only that tackling
climate change can coexist with economic growth, but also that global capitalism is an
important part of tackling climate change through technological innovation and investment in
renewable energy.
Costa Rica generates over 98% of its electricity from renewable sources and benefits a
great deal economically from eco-tourism, demonstrating that economic development can
align with environmental sustainability.
Paragraph Three
Point Of Difference
A final difference between the tragedy of the commons theory and sustainable development is
the extent to which they have influenced international agreements to tackle climate change.
Sustainable Development
Sustainable development has been influential in the most prominent international efforts and
agreements to tackle climate change to date. It has naturally gained support from governments
and corporations who hold the real power and have an interest in continued economic growth.Examine The Differences Between Sustainable Development and The Tragedy Of The Commons. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan2
This can be seen in the Paris Agreement, which supported a flexible, market-friendly
approach to tackling climate change.
It allows countries to set their own Nationally Determined Contributions NDCs), enabling
them to align their climate goals with economic growth, while encouraging innovation and
investment in cleaner technologies rather than mandating disruptive systemic changes.
The Tragedy Of The Commons
By contrast, the tragedy of the commons theory highlights the obstacles to international
cooperation and why more radical and ambitious global agreements havenʼt yet been reached.
This can be seen in the fact that the United States, a major emitter, failed to sign the Kyoto
Protocol and pulled out of the Paris Agreement under Trumpʼs first presidency.
The IPCC predicts that the current commitments of countries place the world on a
devastating trajectory for a 2.7°C to 3.1°C rise in temperatures by the end of the century.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting This Plan To
Answer
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedExamine The Differences Between Sustainable Development and The Tragedy Of The Commons. 12 Politics Explained 12 Marker Plan3
