Ecology - The study of the relationship between living beings and the environment. This has implications for deep- and shallow-green views of the state, society and the economy 

Holism - The view of the environment as a complex whole rather than a collection of parts. This is in opposition to the mechanistic world view of post-Enlightenment science that dominates the state and society in its view of the non-human world and the economy

Environmental Ethics - A different approach to future generations, other species and the material world around us. This involves developing new moral standards and values for human relations with each other and the non-human world, which will underpin the state, society and economy – to cover the nature of ethics and how far they extend 

Post Materialist and Anti-Consumerism - The criticisms of materialism and consumerism and how to move beyond them.

Industrialism - Based on large-scale production, a faith in science and technology, and the accumulation of capital and continuous growth to satisfy material needs, which is the super ideology of the complete left-right political spectrum. 

Consumerism - A psychological and cultural view that focuses on consuming goods and services as a means to feel good about ourselves and drive economic growth.

Sustainability - The capacity of the ecological system to maintain its health over time, one of the most contested ideas in ecologism. Ensuring that resource competition is limited to a rate that will not endanger the long-term future of life on Earth. This involves the capacity of the ecological system to maintain its health over time – to cover the need for, type and way of delivering sustainability, which has implications for the state, society and the economy.

Environmental Consciousness - A state of being where your sense of self is fully realised by a deep identification with the non-human world; this is the basis for a new form of ethics and social organisation. 

Green capitalism - The market will deliver environmental solutions based on a strong faith in technology solutions and capitalism’s response to ecologically-aware consumers.

Mechanistic World View - post-Enlightenment science sees nature exist for the convenience of humankind and nature as a machine where the parts can be understood, fixed or replaced in isolation from the whole. View that nature exists for the convenience of humankind and nature as a machine where the parts can be understood, fixed or replaced. 

Limits to Growth - The criticisms of materialism and consumerism and how to move beyond them.

Decentralisation - Decentralised societies based around communes, villages or bioregions that can achieve sustainability through a high level of self-sufficiency, making them dependent on their natural environment.

Ecocentric Equality - nature-centred rather than a human-centred system of values that gives priority to ecological balance

Anthropocentric - the non-human world is there purely as a means to human ends and non-human nature has only human instrumental value. 

Enlightened Anthropocentric - Humans have a responsibility to the environment but it can be justified as being to serve other humans

Biodiversity - The diversity of species within a biotic community, which brings the benefits of health and stability to the community.

Budhist Economics - This is economics as if people mattered based on the principle of meeting all human needs with no more consumption than is necessary. 

Ecocentric equality - nature-centred rather than a human-centred system of values that gives priority to ecological balance

