#separator:tab
#html:false
Why do socialists advocate collectivism?	Because collective human effort is both of greater practical value and moral value to society than the effort of individuals
Why is collectivism more practically valuble in economic terms?	Collectivism encourages collaboration and uses the capabilities of the whole of society, avoiding the wastefulness and limited impact of competitive individual effort inherent capitalism
Why do socialists endorse collectivism from a moral perspective?	The interests of the group - such as society or a community, should take priority over individual self-interests. Collective effort encourages social unity and social responsibility towards others.
How do socialists promote collectivist interests?	State intervention - Ensure that distribution of goods and services are not left to free market forces Industrial action Collective ownership of the means of production.
How do Marxists propose collectivism be implimented?	Centralised state that organises production and distribution USSR after 1929 to transform a backwards state into a modern industrial economy. Workers control of the means of production. Industrial action.
What are the two criticisms of collectivism?	Because collectivism emphasises group action and common interests, it suppresses human individuality and diversity. As collectivist objectives can obly be advanced through the agency of the state, it leads ot the growth of arbitrary state power and the erosion of freedom (The Road to Serfdom, Hayek)  Collectivism in developed countries produces a dependency culture and an uncompetitive economy.
How do socialists see humans?	Views human nature in a positive light and regards progress and human development as natural.   Views human nature as shaped by events and experiences, so sides with nurture as opposed to nature.    Human are naturally inclined towards co-operation
How do fundementalist socialists view capitalist competition?	Fundamentalist socialists argue that capitalism is intrinsically oppressive to human nature, forcing individuals to abandon their altruistic, communitarian inclinations and embrace cutthroat, dog-eat-dog competition Marx condemned capitalism as a system which inevitably fostered alienation and class conflict by splitting society into two irreconcilable factions with diverging interests - the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. The bourgeoise seeks to maximise profit and reduce labour costs, whilst proletarians desire maximum wages, ingraining the two in perpetual conflict
How do evolutionary socialists criticise capitalism?	Like fundamentalist socialists, evolutionary socialists criticise the excessive, socially harmful inequalities arising from free market capitalism. Beatrice Webb went so far as to declare that ‘the possession of wealth, especially the inheritance of wealth, seems invariably to sterilise genius.’ by encouraging complacency and idleness amongst the upper class at the expense of the proletarians
What are the 5 core ideas and principles of socialism?	Collectivism Common humanity Equality (social, political, economic)Social classWorkers control.
Why do fundamentalist socialists endorce common ownership of the means of production?	As wealth is created by the communal endavour of humans, it should be owned collectively, not by individuals. According to Marx, the 'surplus value' created by workers is appropriated by the capitalist. They are not paid for the full fruits of their labourPrivate property encourages materialism and fosters the false belief that the achievement of wealth brings fulfilment. Private property generates social conflicts between 'have' and 'have-not' groups, such as owners and workers.
Why do socialists endorce equality?	FairnessReinforces collectivism, co operation and solidarity. Social inequality encourages class conflict and instability. Competitive free market creates a 'dog-eat-dog' outlookBetter at satisfying human needs if resources are equally distributed.
What is the idea of common humanity?	nature of humans as social creatures with a tendency to co- operation, sociability and rationalitythe individual cannot be understood without reference to society, as human behaviour is socially determined
The former clause 4 of the labour party was to - to secure for the workers… the [...] and the most [...] that may be possible upon the basis of common ownership of the means of production, distribution and exchange.	The former clause 4 of the labour party was to - to secure for the workers… the full fruits of their industry and the most equitable distribution that may be possible upon the basis of common ownership of the means of production, distribution and exchange.
