#separator:tab
#html:false
What did Beatrice Webb say about inheritance?	‘the possession of wealth, especially the inheritance of wealth, seems invariably to sterilise genius.
According to Karl Marx, The State is The [...]	According to Karl Marx, The State is The executive commitee for managing the affairs of the bourgeoise
According to Karl Marx, the state is but [...]	According to Karl Marx, the state is but an executive committee for managing the affairs of the bourgeoise
According to Karl Marx, From each [...]	According to Karl Marx, From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs.
Socialist thinkers and themes	
"According to Marx, a communist society will arise when ""The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, by degree, all [...] from the bourgeoisie, to centralise all [...] in the hands of the State, i.e., of the proletariat organised as the ruling class; and to increase the total [...] as rapidly as possible"	"According to Marx, a communist society will arise when ""The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, by degree, all capital from the bourgeoisie, to centralise all instruments of production in the hands of the State, i.e., of the proletariat organised as the ruling class; and to increase the total productive forces as rapidly as possible"
According to Lenin, The essence of bourgeois parliamentarianism is deciding every few years which member of [...]	According to Lenin, The essence of bourgeois parliamentarianism is deciding every few years which member of the ruling class is to repress and crush the people through Parliament
According to Proudhon, universal suffrage is [...]	According to Proudhon, universal suffrage is counter revolution
What did Eduard Bernstein argue in Evolutionary Socialism (1899)	Capitalism was not developing along Marxist lines. Instead of succembing to econoimc crises and promoting ever deepening class confict, the capitalist system was proving resilient and adaptable. Joint stock companies had widened the ownership of weath, rather than concentrating it in the hands of fewer capitalists. Berstein concluded that capitalism could be reformed through electoral policies State ownership of key industries, Legal safeguardsWelfare measures to protect workers.
What were Marx's key ideas (1818-1883)?	"Social class is central to socialism. Historical materialism - Marxist theory that the base (economic system) determines the superstructure (culture, politics, law, religion, art)Dialectical change - development occurs through the struggle between the oppressed and the oppressorHuman beings are social creatures - true common humanity can only be expressed under communism. Capitalism encourages dog-eat-dog competitonThe need for revolution ""Workers of the world - Unite"""
What is historical materialism?	Marxist theory that the economic base (system) forms the superstrcture (culture, politics, law, ideology, religion, art and social conciousness)Historical and social development can be explained in terms of economic and class factors. The economic system 'conditions' all other aspects of society
What is dialectical change?	Dialectical change is a process of development that occurs through the conflict or struggle between two opposing forces.  Marx and Engels thought that at each stage of human history, dialectical change is propelled by the struggle between exploiters and the exploited (for example, capitalists and workers).  This process only ends with the establishment of a communist society.
What were Beatrice Webb's main ideas (1858-1943)	The ‘inevitability of gradualness’– establishing socialism peacefully by passing democratic reforms through existing parliamentary institutions.   The expansion of the state will deliver socialism. The state will be the main engineer of social projects and welfare. Run by specialist technocrats. (Wrote Clause 4 of the Labour party)
Why did Beatrice Webb reject the Marxist belief in revolution	Embraced the 'inevitability of gradualness' because the new mass age of democracy would inevitably lead to policies to secure the interests of the working class. The move towards socialism could be sped up by presenting arguments and research to show the efficiency of socialism compared to capitalism.
What were Rosa Luxemburg's (1871-1919) key ideas?	Evolutionary socialism is not possible as capitalism is based on economic exploitation.     Struggle by the proletariat creates the class-consciousness needed to overthrow the capitalist state.  Economy should be based on workers control
Why did Luxemburg argue that socialism could only be achieved through a revolution?	Any evolutionary or revisionist socialist strategy would leave the capitalist system of economic exploitation intact. Worker organisations would never be able to determine their wages or resolve the contradiction between social production and the private appropriation of wealth. Socialist parties would lose their sense of political purpose and the revolutionary instincts of the working class would be dampened.     An evolutionary or reformist socialist strategy could never smooth away the exploitation inherent in the capitalist economy, because the contradictions and crises of capitalism made its collapse inevitable.
Why did Luxemburg believe the collapse of capitalism to be inevitable?	In The Accumulation of Capital (1913), Luxemburg said that the capitalist market could not absorb all the surplus value generated. By accessing less economically developed territories and markets, capitalist states effectively exported the capitalist system. Eventually, capitalism would run out of new territories and markets to exploit and the system would collapse.
Why did Luxemburg believe that class conciousness would develop naturally?	In The Mass Strike, the Political Party and the Trade Unions (1906) she argued that this consciousness would develop naturally from within the workers themselves. Proletarian discontent against state control would erupt in numerous unsuccessful and successful strikes, culminating in a spontaneous mass strike, which would radicalise the workers and bring about a socialist revolution
How did Luxemburg disagree with Lenin?	Luxemburg rejected Lenin’s argument that the workers had to be led by a small, rigidly centralised vanguard party in order to overthrow capitalism. In her view, a revolutionary party that demanded blind obedience would create an ‘absolute dividing wall’ between the leaders and the mass membership, thus preventing workers from becoming ‘free and independent directors’ of society under socialism.
According to Luxemburg, ‘The mass strike is the first natural, impulsive form of every great revolutionary struggle of the proletariat and the more highly developed the antagonism is between capital and labour, the more effective and decisive must mass strikes become.’	
What were Crosland's main ideas? (1918-1977)	Capitalism no longer resembled an economic system based on inherent contradictions. Therefore, modern capitalism lacked the internal tension required to drive social change and bring about revolution. (due to democracy, industrial bargaining and dispersal of business ownership)State managed capitalism to deliver greater social justice
Why did Crosland argue that capitalism lacked the internal contradictions and tensions to bring about revolution?	Extension of democracy, the growth of industrial bargaining and the dispersal of busines ownership. Capitalism had produced high living standards. A comprehensive welfare state had been established and governments could use Keynsian economics.
What were Crosland's four justifications for equality?	Economic efficiency – there was no clear relationship between an individual’s status and rewards and the importance of their economic function.     Creation of a more communitarian society – existing inequalities created resentments, which had an adverse effect on economic progress.     The injustice of rewarding talents and abilities – these were largely due to nature and nurture, not individual responsibility.     The need for social justice – Crosland called this ‘democratic equality’ and argued that socialism had to move beyond equality of opportunity.
How did Crosland want to manage an economy?	"Through Kensian demand management of a mixed economy, with some nationalised industries in a system based on private ownership. - generate growth Economic expansion would generate the funds for welfare. Redistribution to create equalityExpansion of education, to be as equal as possible. ""If it's the last thing I do I'm going to destroy every grammer school in England and Wales'"
What did Crosland think about Marx?	Marx has little or nothing to offer the contemporary socialist
What were Anthony Giddens' key ideas? (1938-)	The 'third way' a compromise between neoliberalism and socialism. The rejection of state intervention and acceptance of free market in the economy, with emphasis on equality of opportunity and community over class conflict. The role of the state is 'social investment' in infrastructure and education, not economic and social engineering.
Why did Giddens believe that social democracy had to be modernised?	Globalisation, the rise of the knowledge economy and the growth of individualistic aspiratoins. 'top down' state intervention is inefficient. The left should 'get comfortable with markets' as it is the most efficient system of production (growth benefits all) and encourages responsibility. Social engineering and excessive redistribution encouraged a 'culture of dependency' and created a disincentive to invest - which was needed for a competitve economy.
How did Giddens believe that markets could be made fairer?	By providing equality of opportunity. Governments should intervene to tame inequality of outcome. Stressed the importance of community and responsibility, to offset the negative effects of the free market (excessive materialism and competitive individualism). - promotes social cohesion, shared values and social responsibility.
According to Giddens, The new mixed economy looks for a [...] between public and private sectors	According to Giddens, The new mixed economy looks for a synergy between public and private sectors
Why are workers and employers ingrained in perpetual conflict according to Karl Marx?	Employers want to work employees as hard as possible, and pay as little as possible Workers want to achieve higher wages, and work as little as possible\These diverging interests ingrain the two in perpetual conflict
