#separator:tab
#html:false
Karl Marx (1818-83) and Friedrich Engels (1820-95) - Key ideas	Key ideas:   1. Social class is central to socialism 2. Human nature is socially determined and can only be expressed under communism
Marx and Engels - Social class   Name of their work	- The Communist Manifesto (1848) - For Marx and Engels, social class is central to socialism and underpins three key elements of Marxism:   1. historical materialism - maintains that historical and social development can be explained in terms of economic and class factors -> economic system conditions all other aspects of society   2. dialectic change - the process of development that occurs through the conflict of two oppressing forces, Marx and Engels thought that at each stage of human history there was the struggle between the exploiters and the exploited -> process only ends with the establishment of the communist society   3. class consciousness - class consciousness is need for oppressed to overthrow oppressors, under capitalism the proletariat need to be fully aware of the extent of their exploitment to rally and overthrow bourgeoisie
Marx and Engels 3 - human nature   - Like most socialists they view humans as __ - Humans are ___ who can lead what kind of lives - Such conditions are ____ - Only solution is __	- Like most socialists they view humans as essentially social beings whose behaviour is influenced more by their surroundings than nature - Humans sociable, rational and co-operative who can lead fufilling lives of work and creativity - Such conditions are seen as unable to exist under capitalism and humans cannot realise their true potential - Only solution is a communist society that removes the exploitation and enables humans to achieve self-fufilment and achieve their passions
Beatrice Webb (1858-1943) 1 - Key ideas	1. The 'inevitability of gradualness' -> establishing socialism peacefully through established democratic process 2. The expansion of the state will deliver socialism
Beatrice Webb 2 - Core bulk   - Small background - Rejected marxist theory of ___ endorsing '___' -> explain the key idea   - What did she reject? - Views on voters - Believed expansion of state crucial in ___ - Emphasised the importance of who? - Over time the state would do what?	- Father of an industrialist and member of Fabian Society - Rejected Marxist theory of a class struggle instead endorsing 'inevitability of gradualness' -> she thought that the new mass of democtic policies would inevitably lead to policies securing the interests of the working class   - Held a somewhat elist attitude rejecting direct democracy and wokers' control on the basis that the average voter was limited and uninformed - Webb believed the expansion of the state to be crucial in delivering socialism as she witnessed the gradual growth of the state power as evidence that collectivism would bring a social age - Webb emphasised the importance of highly trained specialists to control the economy - Over time the state would intervene in more areas of life as they would need regulation and planning
Rosa Luxemburg (1871-1919) 1 - Key ideas	1. evolutionary socialism is not possible as capitalism is based on exploitation 2. struggle by the proletariat creates the class-consciousness needed to overthrow capitalist state
Luxemburg 2 - Core bulk   What was her background and what did she critique?   Name of her book and what did she argue in it  Why was a revolution essential? (2)   Luxemburg argued that capitalist system would collapse due to what? How did she believe class-consciouness would come about?	- Polish Marxist revolutionary in the German Social Democratic Party - In her literature she critiqued evolutionary socialism and revisionism   - In Social Reform or Revolution 1899 she argued that socialism could not be gradually introduced through reform -> it was essential for proletariat to use revolution for 2 key reasons: 1. any revisionist strategy would leave capitalist system of exploitation intact -> workers would never be able to negotiate higher wages  2. any evolutionary strategy could never smooth over the exploitation inherent in the capitalist economy   - Luxemburg argued that the capitalist market exported itself into less economically developed territories which it would then exploit -> she argued the whole system would collapse when it runs out of new territories - She believed that class consciousness would develop naturally from within the workers leading to numerous successful and unsuccessful strikes until a final mass strike would radicalise the workers and the capitalist state would be overthrown
Anthony Crosland (1918-77) - Core bulk   - Crosland was a leading ___ having major influence on ___ - What did he claim in his work? lack of ___ - What factors caused this claim? (4)   - He argued that __ was the main aim of socialism now  -> how could this be achieved? (2)	- Crosland was a leading post-war revisionist in British socialism having a major influence on the Labour Party  - In his work The Future of Socialism he claimed that capitalism had been radically changed and no longer resembled an economic system as expliotative as Marx had origionally highlighted -> meaning there was a lack of internal tension which could drive a revolution   This was seen as due to: -> the extension of democracy -> the dispersal of business ownership  -> nationalised industries and established welfare state - Capitalism had produced rising living standards   - He argued that Keynesian management and nationalised industries were the best way to achieve high levels of economic growth
Anthony Giddens (1938-)   - 2 key ideas   - What book did he publish and what did he call for - Themes (2)   - What did giddens believe as the best driver for growth - How to offset free market negative effects - Argued what about state welfare - What could replace it?	Key ideas: 1. the 3rd way approach to social democracy 2. the rejection of state intervention   - Giddens was a British sociologist and was arguably the most important contributor to the 'third way' - Giddens in his work The Third Way: The Renewal of Social Democracy -> he called for a new approach based on neo-liberal free market traditions - 2 key themes: 1. rejection of state intervention and acceptence of free market with an emphasis on equality of opportunity rather than equality 2. the role of the state in social investment in infrastructure and education   - Giddens believed that the market was the best driver of growth but it needed to be fair so everyone had an equal chance in bettering themselves through their ability - Also stressed the importance of community and responsibility in part to offset the negative effects of the free market - Argued that state welfare used by previous social democratic admins created a dependancy culture and the taxation simply discouraged investment and entrepreneurship - Instead the state should priortise social investment eg education to ensure the workforce was educated enough
Key thinkers (5)	1. Rosa Luxemburg - Polish Marxist revolutionary - Believed capitalism would collapse once it ran out of new territories to exploit - A revolution was essential considering the extent to which capitalists were entrenched within their power - Given the capitalist system was still intact, workers would never be able to negotiate higher wages - Social Reform or Revolution 1899   2. Karl Marx - Humans sociable, rational and co-operative who can lead fufilling lives of work and creativity - Such conditions are seen as unable to exist under capitalism and humans cannot realise their true potential -> Only solution is the removal of capitalism - Dialectic change / class consciousness - The Communist Manifesto (1848)    3. Beatrice Webb - Daughter of an industrialist - Claimed the ever-expanding state would eventually lead to a mass wave of socialist policy and a command economy - Inevitability of gradualness   4. Anthony Giddens - Endorsement of the free market as the best driver of growth - Equality of opportunity rather than equality - The role of the state in social investment in infrastructure and education - The Third Way: The Renewal of Social Democracy    5. Anthony Crosland - Capitalism no longer represented a system of explotation as it was when Marx concocted his theory  - Leading figure in the creation of the Labour Party - Argued that keynesian economic management and nationalised industries could help ensure greater equality - The Future of Socialism
