'Readers and audiences delight in seeing the rules of society undermined and broken.'

In light of this view, explore how the radical and subversive is presented by the writers you have studied. Remember to refer to the contexts in which your texts were written and received.

In both texts rule breaking is central to the story. The fall and the marriage of the Duchess and Antonio break rules put out by the central authority of the texts, God and then the Aragonian brothers. The idea of "good" and "bad" rule breaking will be explored and how different characters and acts would illicit different responses. Additionally, the reaction of Satan from literary figures and audiences will be compared. The question will also be challenged with the idea that to some audience members it would undoubtedly be more "delightful" to watch people be punished than break rules.

Both texts present a multitude of characters who break the rules, but audience response is dictated by factors such as the specific rules broken and the morality of the character. Different characters may be responded to in different ways due to the morality of their actions or their rhetorical strength. The Duchess and Antonio, while technically breaking a societal rule of class and relationship, would have been looked upon positively as a more modern (to the time) puritan understanding of love and marriage. This is presented in many ways: their love is compared to the divine "spheres" by Antonio, hinting that love is on the same level as the divine, which during the early modern period was a much more important thing than today. This is also evidenced by Bosola's reaction to the Duchess unveiling their marriage. Despite Bosola's role as Ferdinand's intelligencer, he is unable to hide his genuine excitement over the prospect of a world where "to prefer a man merely for worth, without these shadows of wealth and painted honours" despite his status in opposition to the Duchess, he is unable to disdain the "rule breaking" of her marriage and is instead enthused by it. A piece of contemporary context that shows the audience may also be forgiving of the Duchess and Antonio. The case of Arbella Stuart is similar and contemporary, and throughout Stuart's struggle for escape, she was helped by people, including the king's guards. The audience would have likely drawn parallels, as both Arbella Stuart's house arrest and the Duchess of Malfi's release happened in the mid-1610s. Both modern and early modern audiences are likely to delight in this rule-breaking. The actions of the Cardinal would likely be seen as always bad. He would be villainised by a protestant audience for being a corrupt and morally evil Catholic playing into a common stereotype of the time. He was also complicit in the murder of many people, including his own lover Julia, which would have been seen as morally debaucherous. Antonio described him to Delio as being capable of "lays worse plots for them than / ever was impos'd on Hercules". Eve is a character that could be seen as both good and bad in her rule-breaking. Early modern audiences may see her as being written by Milton, someone who literally brought all sin into the world. A modern reader may see her in a more feminist way and sympathise with her desire to be "more equal" to Adam, while what she did may be "wrong" modern audiences may be more likely to sympathise and not delight in her rule-breaking but understand it. Adam may be more delightful to some, as he chose to fall with Eve because he could not see himself living without her. This again reinforces the sanctity of marriage and might have delighted a modern or early modern audience.

A character such as Satan was more divisive, as while being the incarnation of evil, he often would argue his evil well and this led to sympathy and delight. An example of this is when he convinces Eve to eat the apple: "ye shall not Die: / How should ye? by the Fruit? it gives you life." While what he is encouraging is wrong, it is argued well, and this caused some to react differently. Literary figures, both contemporary and later, came out in praise of Milton's Satan, both morally and as a character. William Blake wrote that "The reason Milton wrote in fetters when he wrote of Angels & God, / and at liberty when of Devils & Hell, is because he was a true Poet / and of the Devil's party without knowing it." It is clear that there was a reaction of praise and enjoyment of Satan as a character in the literary community. There was also praise for the morality of Satan in comparison with God in Paradise Lost. Percy Byron Shelley, in The Defence of Poetry, wrote, "Milton's devil as a moral being is... far superior to God." This is again another literary figure delighting at a character in Paradise Lost who broke many rules. There is a judgement of delight at the character rule-breaking due to the quality of the character and his moral writing. The context of Areopagiticia is useful here, as many of Satan's earlier libertarian arguments show a similarity to Milton's argument for "uncloistered virtue." Milton was similarly a radical in his society who was not appreciated by all and even was persecuted for his views. Satan's argument that "Better to reign in Hell, then serve in Heav'n" rings true with Milton's position under Cromwell and thus could illuminate why Satan is such a well-reputed character among literary figures. There are a sizeable number of people who, based on Milton's views, would delight in watching Satan break the rules. Contrary to this, an audience may be disgusted by Satan for deciding that heaven was not good enough for him and find his rulebreaking truly deplorable. Ben Jonson's poem 'On My First Sonne' remarks, "For why / Will man lament the state he should envy?" showing many people in the early modern period saw heaven as preferable to the uncertainty and death of the world. This is reinforced by another figure in the traditional epic Achilles, who, when interviewed by Odysseus in the underworld, stated, "I would rather be a paid servant in a poor man's house and be above ground than king of kings among the dead." To many figures, both the audience and other texts, Satan's libertarian attitude towards hell and then the fall of the man is anything but delightful. However, a modern audience may once again be more sympathetic with Satan due to the propensity to be less religious so they once again may take Satan more from what he had written rather than biblical context on his evils.

Contrary to what the question proposes to an early modern audience, the idea of someone, especially a figure of nobility, being punished for their rule-breaking may be delightful. James I and his court were reputed for being corrupt, and there was little an ordinary citizen of the early modern era could do to rectify this. The Duchess of Malfi itself looks to satirise the corruption of English courts. Additionally, the God of Paradise Lost with his "spies" could be seen as a representation of the crown seeking to persecute Milton. In this society, a citizen may delight in watching a figure like Ferdinand and the Cardinal receive their punishment, as delightful as watching a character such as the Duchess breaking rules. Some audience members may still see the Duchess as too radical of a figure due to her defiance of her brothers and often more dominant role in her relationship with Antonio. Her dominance is shown by differences in speech, such as in Act 1, Scene 2, where she has many more lines than Antonio and literally dominates the conversation. This may lead to some audience members disliking her subversion of the position of an early modern woman and additionally delighting in her punishment rather than her rule-breaking. Additionally, members of a higher class may be delighted to see ambitious characters such as Antonio and Bosola struck down. I find it hard to see how anyone could not delight in seeing the detestable and corrupt Arogonian brothers punished after their foul treatment of the Duchess.

In conclusion, both texts tactfully present a range of characters which break a variety of societal rules. Whether audiences would be "delighted" is heavily influenced by the character and their justifications along with the audience composition and era. Both texts show characters that are more nuanced than simply "delightful" or not and thus produce characters that are enjoyable to read and leave the audience questioning their own morality. In some instances the audience will be delighted as in entertained without necessarily being pleased or happy at the character.


