Compare Webster's presentation of Julia and the Cardinal with Milton's presentation of Eve and Satan.

Both writers present characters experiencing temptation which will lead to downfall. Both writers also present knowledge as a dangerous thing, while Satan disguises the danger of knowledge the Cardinal is open as he is being tempted and warns Julia of the destructive nature of knowledge. Both sets of characters are presented as having a relationship with Satan using flattery and rhetoric to overpower Eve's will and Julia argues that she should hold the Cardinal's greatest secrets.

Knowledge is portrayed as a burden or danger in both texts, but notably the characters of Paradise Lost do not acknowledge this, but it is later shown through the events of the fall. The Cardinal especially acknowledges the dangers of knowledge saying, 'think what danger 'tis / To receive a prince's secrets.', this secret leads to Julia's death. The Cardinal forewarns Julia, but Julia ignores him, this is like when Satan in book IV of Paradise Lost acknowledged 'I could repent and could obtain By Act of Grace, my former state' but instead chooses to doom himself similarly to Julia. This raises a key point in both relationships, the tempter wins in both. Julia eventually with repetition and strong rhetoric - another point of comparison with Satan - wears down the Cardinal and convinces him to confide in her, this is a change to the usual power structure of the time and would have subverted the expectations of an early modern audience. Julia uses the metaphor of a ruler who does not share secrets 'But the last tyranny.' to convince the Cardinal arguing that he must not want to share his secrets due to their nature, this is not only an accurate assessment but reinforces the Cardinal's argument that secrets and therefore knowledge are dangerous and harmful. An early modern audience may be shocked or not surprised by the nature of Julia and the Cardinal's relationship, not only due to its subversion of gender roles but also the fact a Cardinal is having a sinful affair. However, early modern English audiences may expect a catholic churchman to act this way, in John Donne's Holy Sonnet 18 the catholic church is described using the metaphor of a woman that is 'richly painted' this shows an attitude that the catholic church is a 'harlot' and could be filled of unreliable churchmen. Satan portrays knowledge as a wonderful and divine thing saying to Eve he gained 'to degree / Of Reason in my inward Powers, and Speech', he is speaking of how the fruit gave him the gift of knowledge and how this is a wonderful and incomparable thing. Contrary to the Cardinal who warns Julia of the danger of knowledge Satan tries to convince Eve that knowledge is the best and most important thing there is. It is clear in other ways that Satan is being deceitful, he did not eat the fruit to gain his consciousness and is instead a fallen angel pretending to be a snake. When he says 'All other Beasts that saw, with like desire / Longing and envying stood, but could not reach.' it makes it clear he is lying and this brings into question all he is saying about the fruit. The entire relationship and conversation between Eve and Satan is deceitful and only designed to harm Eve whereas Julia tries to find the Cardinal's secret to help him. While knowledge is presented as wholly good by Satan it becomes clear it damages Eve as the Cardinal warned Julia. Knowledge would immediately lead to Julia's death from the Cardinal but it also leads to Eve's death as God makes the human's mortal. Julia tempts the Cardinal with good intentions and Satan does not tempt Eve with good intentions but in both situations the character burdened with knowledge suffers the fate of death either immediately or later. Both texts imply that knowing more can be disastrous, an early modern audience would understand this concept since they were taught to accept things without learning more or questioning further such as the status of the afterlife. This can be demonstrated by the work On my First Son by Ben Jonson where he writes 'For why / Will man lament the state he should envy?' speaking of how people fear death but since they know they will experience, this shows an early modern attitude of accepting the state of things as they are prescribed instead of seeking more knowledge which could be a burden or danger.

Both sets of characters experience attraction in a sensory way to each other. Satan uses flattery and rhetoric to try to seduce Eve. Satan says 'But all that fair and good in thy Divine / Semblance, and in thy Beauties heav'nly Ray / United I beheld; no Fair to thine' telling her in all the divine beauty he saw he did not expereince beauty like hers later calling her 'universal Dame.'. Satan's flattery works on Eve and his attraction and admiration of her is longstanding with early in book IV it being stated that 'Much hee the Place admir'd, the Person more.', he explains that he thinks earth is better than heaven due to it being built with 'second thoughts' and 'For what God after better worse would build?' but still admires Eve more. An early modern audience may have been more used to divinity and relgiion being intermixed with sexuality as Satan did with Eve, for example the Song of Songs or Holy Sonnet 18 by John Donne.

I have placed your response in level 4 (25/30). 
Well down for offering a specific range of contexts. I am pleased to see you using the materials we have seen in class before. This is a good strategy. Good use of Paradise Lost Book 4 as well. This is clear and comparative throughout. Your line of argument is clear. The only thing you might do to improve is to explore clearly labelled alternative readings of the texts.
Sydney Wylie15.01.24



