w'Differences of opinion are unavoidable in human societies'.
In the light of this view, consider the ways in which writers explore clashes of opinion.

In the texts, Webster and Milton both explore the idea of differences of opinion heavily. They both present characters with large differences in opinion, but they also present characters at odds with their own society. Firstly, the interpersonal differences will be explored, then the societal differences of opinion, and lastly, whether the difference in opinion is a negative thing. The writers differ on all three, especially whether the difference is negative.

In interpersonal relationships, these texts disagree about whether differences of opinion can be avoided, and in each text, it depends on the relationship. The various interpersonal relationships that populate both texts, "human societies," all reach various levels of difference in opinion, and this causes conflict. In the Duchess of Malfi, Antonio and the Duchess do not argue and seem united on every front. They are compared to "the spheres; be still in motion!" This is significant as the "spheres" or planets were seen as divinely ordered and thus organised in such a way that perhaps there should not be conflict. While it may seem inevitable that relationships such as marriage would cause differences of opinion throughout Malfi, the Duchess and Antonio stay both loyal and in agreement with each other. Even when the Duchess sends Antonio away, he does not argue but instead agrees. During this time, it will have been seen as the man's role to protect their wife, and to be sent away for your own protection may have conflicted with Antonio as an early modern man's ideals, but he does not have a difference of opinion. This suggests their relationship is strong and harmonious. The use of "unavoidable" in the question suggests that avoiding differences may be preferable, and Antonio and the Duchesses' marriage does not have conflict. In Paradise Lost, book IX, Adam and Eve argue and have notable differences of opinion. Eve and Adam argue over whether they should garden together or separately. They have a difference of opinion, with Eve believing love "unassayed" is worthless, whereas Adam believes risk in the form of temptation and separation should be avoided. Adam may seem right as their separation leads to the fall and pushes them into a post-lapsarian world; however, when considering Eve's opinion, even under the threat of death and judgement from God, Adam and Eve's relationship stands and perhaps has been tested better and thus proved stronger than it was before. External forces proliferate further disagreement in Paradise Lost as the interference of Satan leads to Eve falling and subsequently deciding whether to keep her new-found knowledge from Adam or share in it. While she ultimately decides to share it with Adam, this external source almost causes an irreparable split between the humans in the epic poem. The argument of Adam and Eve's relationship may make it weaker in comparison to the Duchesses and Antonio's, but under Eve's idea of assayed love, it may be considered equally strong or even stronger. Other interpersonal relationships with the Duchess of Malfi often have conflicts that seem unavoidable. The Cardinal and Ferdinand fundamentally disagree with the Duchesses' decision to marry for love, and this causes the main conflict of the play to be the imprisonment and later death of the Duchess. Ferdinand may also disagree with the Duchesses' marriage due to his own inappropriate interest in her, which again is a difference in opinion as she does not reciprocate. Overall, the Duchess of Malfi seems to agree that particularly strong relationships may not have to disagree, but other relationships, such as those between Ferdinand and the Duchess, might. The only human relationship we see in Paradise Lost disagrees, but this could be a show of strength, according to Eve, as love has to be "assayed.".

These texts also examine the differences in opinion caused by the interaction between people and their societies. In The Duchess of Malfi, Bosola is placed in disagreement with most other characters due to their place in a corrupt court-based society. I found, as a modern reader, that Bosola was often more understandable compared to other characters due to his opposition to this society that is completely alien to modern readers. He is noted by Antonio to "rail(s) at those things which he wants," and this shows that even within himself, he has a clash of opinions due to disliking the corrupt society he inhabits but also wanting to acquire status and power. This causes further conflicts with the Cardinal and Ferdinand after he decides to try and find a sense of justice after his misdoings throughout the play. It may be observed that there are inevitable differences of opinion due to the rigid class structure of such a society. Eden represents a perfect society and paradise before the fall, but there are still differences in human opinion, such as when Adam and Eve disagree on how to do gardening. Both texts present societies where disagreement seems inevitable. Antonio also fundamentally disagrees with the nature of society, believing that from the court good things should come but instead come poison: "whence should flow, pure silver drops in general, but if 't chance, some curs'd example poison 't near the head, / Death and diseases through the whole land spread." This disagreement also causes conflict; Antonio's marriage to the Duchess is disagreed upon by the Cardinal and Ferdinand views on marriage that match societal views of marriage as arranged and political rather than for love. This also represents a growing societal disagreement on marriage between the old-fashioned ideals of arranged marriage and the newer ideals of love represented by the Duchess and Antonio, and this is shared by the growth of puritanism. I found surprising the amount of agency afforded to Eve and the Duchess, and this could be seen as another clash in opinion with a patriarchal society. However, in A Godlie Forme of Householde Government (1598), it was noted that women could have some form of governance over the household, such as Eve deciding how to enact gardening. Overall, these texts show societies in which differences of opinion were rife, and this is emblematic of a transitionary period in the early modern period.

A difference of opinion is not necessarily a bad thing, and these texts do not universally present it as a bad thing. Milton regarded the difference of opinion as important, writing that for an opinion to be valuable, it must be an "uncloistered virtue" in Areopagitica. This is emblematic of Milton's greater politics and belief that difference of opinion is what makes opinions truly valuable, showing their strength against other ideas. This mirrors Eve's idea that her love for Adam to be strong must be "assessed," meaning to be tested as with a metal. This shows the Miltonic idea that conflict of ideals is healthy and to be encouraged. While Adam and Eve's argument may seem weaker than Antonio and the Duchesses', it could be seen to be stronger due to it being "assayed" or tested by external forces and their own arguing. Webster may be seen to disagree with this idea due to Antonio and the Duchesses' argument-free relationship, but Bosola takes on the role of the malcontent and disagrees with most of the ideals of the world the play inhabits. Bosola represents a counterpoint to the indulgence of the play, and to an early modern audience, it may seem compelling due to their exposure to a similarly corrupt society. Bosola when he comes to act on his different opinions causes the largest death toll and conflict of the play, this may cause questioning of whether Webster approves of differences of opinion or not. It is difficult to say for certain what Webster may think as he was not as explicit in his other writing as Milton but he was certainly less emphatic about the positives of difference in Malfi.

Overall, both writers explore how differences of opinion are, for the most part, unavoidable and how the societies the texts are set in almost guarantee this. Paradise Lost mostly concludes that difference is not necessarily a bad thing and that it should rather be celebrated, whereas Malfi seems more complicated on the issue.

30

This is a strong essay. You read both texts with an impressive eye for detail and illustrative quotations are excellent. You write argumentatively and critically and you are interesting to read too (I like the small moment of personal response you offer too).
You also make thoughtful, detailed use of context.  You might also explore the parallels with Arbella Stewart for this  essay.

Merit










