The garden is the 'purest of human pleasures; it is the greatest refreshment to the spirits of man; without which buildings and palaces are but gross handyworks.'
In the light of this view, consider ways in which the writers present setting. [30]


Both writers Milton and Webster effectively use setting to further the plot and characterisation of the texts. It will firstly be discussed how gardening and gardens as a setting are used to represent stewardship and husbandry but to a greater extent the morality of characters. It will then be argued that Milton effectively writes of Eden as a walled garden to further his political ideas. It will lastly be discussed how the writers use darkness and light as a metaphor for purity and what this implies about the female characters of the texts. The writers have similarities on the first point and differ on the third.

The idea of gardening is used to represent a larger idea of stewardship and husbandry over one's setting. In Macbeth Duncan says to Macbeth "I have begun to plant thee and will labor / To make thee full of growing." This again evokes the idea of a gardener as a labourer who has responsibility to help grow their subjects. Even a king is humble enough to accept the divine role of gardening. This also links to the metaphor Antonio uses to describe the French court at the beginning of Malfi "Considering duly that a prince's court / Is like a common fountain, whence should ﬂow / Pure silver drops in general." This gives the idea that the king and his court have a responsibility over their land as stewards and are like Duncan's idea of a gardener who should labour those who he has planted. In both texts we see characters with their own dominions who garden over it. We see the Duchess with her Duchy and she is known to be fair and moral to all the characters around her with Antonio describing her as "the right noble Duchess,". She is a good "gardener" of her Duchy. Her brothers seek to destroy this and remove this from her as stated by Ferdinand "Would I could be one, / That I might toss her palace 'bout her ears, / Root up her goodly forests, blast her meads" Ferdinand imagines destroying the Duchesses territory as an expansion of her, the land she tends over is her responsibility and Ferdinand wishes to destroy this. It is also notable that the territory has been ordained to the Duchess as hers to tend over and she does this nobly contrasting the actions of Ferdinand who would most likely extract the value from the "garden" and then abandon it due to apathy. This is comparable to Eve's attitude towards Eden. She is reluctant towards gardening and wants to lighten the workload by splitting it between her and Adam. She tells Adam they should "divide our labours" due to her frustration with the "wanton growth" of Eden. This reflects on Milton's idea of Eden's character as her sense of duty and stewardship is also exposed as lacking when she is tempted by Satan. Despite Eve's dislike of gardening, she is still a better "gardener" than Satan as he just seeks to remove humans from Paradise rather than tend over his land or as Duncan said "make thee full of growing" thee being anything. This is a similarity between the Duchess and Eve both are being targeted by worse "gardeners" who seek to destroy or remove them from their gardens. The idea of a "garden" as a setting either literally or metaphorically is incredibly important to the morality of the characters. Overall, the setting of a garden and task of gardening is uses to extend the characterisation of both texts. 

It is notable that even in pre-lapsarian Eden, there is an argument between Adam and Eve, and while this could be put down to their human form, it also seems heretical considering they were made   in God's image. This implies that Pre-lapsarian argumentis divine, and a part of paradise. This is consistent with Milton's idea of "uncloistered virtue" as presented in Areopagtica. Milton's ideal version of a garden would feature debate, where the worth of ideas exists in relation to their strength against others. Ironically, Eden is described as being surrounded by "the verdurous wall of paradise" (Book 4.) This implies that Eden may not be the uncloistered environment that Milton praises and opens up the interesting idea that Satan is bringing outside ideas, which threaten the walled Eden. I personally interpret this as part of Milton's metaphor for God representing the king. Eve describes God as "Our great Forbidder, safe with all his Spies" and it is easy to see how this kind of figure would choose a wall around Eden rather than going for the Miltonic idea of uncloistered virtue. The setting here works further to emphasise Milton's ideas. An environment with walls leads to a rebellion that dooms humanity to fall. Milton uses the idea of walls around a garden or a cloister to extend the metaphor and his beliefs around the king. Milton uses the idea of a walled garden to explain further his political views and continue the metaphor of God as king in his times.

Lightness and darkness are important to the setting of both texts and come to represent purity. In the Duchess of Malfi light is lost as the Duchess is minimised and then murdered during the play. I found this particularly notable in the 2014 Dominic Dromgoole production where at times the darkness came to feel suffocating and claustrophobic. The use of candles and the later extinguishing of in a theatre meant to recreate the Blackfriars creates an authentic experience. The setting's increasing lack in light reflected the moral degradation of the play. As the Duchess was treated worse and worse up until her death the light leaves the play. In the scene of her torment I thought it was notable she was dressed in a light cream coloured dress contrasting the darkness of her surroundings and the mad men attempting to loosen her grip on sanity. The light of her clothes is correlated with the purity of her character. In John 8:12 Jesus claims "I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." this establishes a biblical link with light and purity and notably this translation is the King James Version from 1611 contemporary to the writing of the Duchess of Malfi. The Duchess is given a biblical purity and morality amplified by her light in the setting of darkness. In Paradise Lost book 9 Eve is described as being deceived by "delusive light" while following Satan during the night. When light is taken away from Eve she is easily deceived by a false replacement, in the darkness of the swamp she looks for a moral and pure centre but is deceived. It is notable that darkness precedes the Duchess' fall and Eve's (and ultimately humanities), this suggests that light is used as a metaphor for morality but the absence of it leads to dreadful consequences. This could also be read further as a comment on women's agency and ability, when these characters are removed from their surroundings of morality and are plunged into darkness metaphorically and not, they fall. In "A Godlie Forme of Householde Management" it was noted women could have control over the kids and some household duties but should still remain subservient to man. The Duchess rejects norms and sends Antonio away "You must instantly part hence:  I have fashion'd it already" this breaks the idea of the contemporary "Godlie Forme of Householde Management" where a woman must stay subservient and shows the Duchess clearly in charge. Similarly in Paradise Lost Eve decides they should garden separately due to the intense amount of labour in the garden, this also seemingly dooms them to the fall. However, the Duchess is strong in the face of darkness and clearly retains agency "I am Duchess of Malfi still", Eve however is written less sympathetically, and Milton uses words like "Greedily", "ingorg'd" and "delight" to show her enthusiasm during the fall. Setting and darkness is used potentially to comment on women with one text being more sympathetic and Paradise Lost portraying Eve as "too easily won".

Overall, these writers present setting as something that can tell us a lot about the characters and morality of the play. Effectively conditions such as light are used to further the plot. Paradise Lost mostly uses its setting to further the ideas of its writer and his perceptions of characters. This is done similarly in Malfi with comments on courts mirroring the corruption of James' court. Both mastefully use setting to present complex ideas.





2


