"Love is the most selfish of emotions."   
In the light of this view, discuss ways in which writers explore love.  
In your answer, compare one drama text and one poetry text from the above lists.

Love is central and essential in both the Jacobean tragedy of The Duchess of Malfi (1614) and the Christian epic of Paradise Lost (1667). In both works several types of love are explored, from agape (love for God) to deeply lustful attraction between characters. Almost all of these types of love can be expressed selfishly. Often these combine with ambition, which was highly scorned in the 17th century. Overall, in both works love is central and multifaceted, and different characters express love differently, whether this is selfish or not.

While love can be selfish, it is often seen as one of the highest virtues, and both works explore purer and holier forms of love. In The Duchess of Malfi, this is chiefly expressed by the seduction and marriage of the Duchess and Antonio. Before the start of their seduction scene in Act 1, Scene 2 of the play, the Duchess goes so far as to describe the marriage as "this dangerous venture", and she says that the "threatenings" they will receive will "assay" the marriage. This correlates to line 335 of Book 9 of Paradise Lost, where Eve asks, "And what is Faith, Love, Vertue unassaid?" to both characters. The Duchess's and Eve's love must prove its value by withstanding challenges. Both characters' willingness to endure the challenges ahead of them in the name of love shows the inherent unselfishness of their deep and true love. The Duchess, in fact, compares the tests their love will endure to "impossible actions" comparable to "men in some great battles", and this further shows the danger she is accepting. The Duchess says this after having just been confronted by her two Aragonian brothers, the antagonists of the play, and is still willing to put herself on the line for her love. This surely must be regarded as one of the most unselfish forms of love, where a character is willing to sacrifice their safety and status ("Diamonds are of most value, / They say, that have pass'd through most jewellers' hands.") for her love. However, it could be argued this is in a way selfish, as she is bringing these dangers upon herself. But it was much more dangerous for a woman to try and achieve agency in this period than a man. This is proven by her eventual fate of becoming a murder victim due to her ambition. Ambition during this period was scorned, particularly for women, and in her action of trying to tempt danger for love, the Duchess shows an ambition and hubris that do not go unpunished. Despite all the later torture and violence that becomes her, her last thoughts are an unselfish love. In Act 4 Scene 2, just before her death from strangulation, the Duchess calls out for "Antonio!" and this shows that her previous claims are truthful, and she truly unselfishly loved Antonio. This was particularly notable in the 2014 Dominic Dromgoole production at the Blackfriars theatre, where Gemma Arterton emotively screamed this line to show the immense amount of grief she feels in her last moments over her husband. This is comparable to the love we are shown between Adam and Eve near the start of Book 9 where they do everything together but are willing to part ways to test their love.
 
The most selfish forms of love are often due to the dire consequences they can bring to the people involved. Both writers present uncontrolled romantic love as very destructive; in both texts, it leads to tragedy. In both PL and DOM love serves as a catalyst for tragedy. In Book 9 of Paradise Lost Adam ultimately decides to eat the apple and enter us into the post-lapsarian world out of an uncontrolled and unbalanced Eros love. Agape love is an important feature of the Christian doctrine that dominated the early modern mind. The abandonment of Agape for Eros by Adam can be seen as a selfish and ultimately dooming act. The physical and human Eros love Adam experiences for Eve acts as a catalyst, ultimately dooming humans for generations to come. Adam says, "Our state cannot be severed, we are one, / One flesh; to lose thee were to love myself". It is clear that the overwhelming human love he feels for Eve is selfishly outweighing the love he feels for God. Eve additionally, arguably selfishly, wishes to keep Adam for herself and wishes him to make him eat the apple and fall. Eve selfishly says that she would rather Adam die with her so she can share that than have them live apart ("Adam shall share with me in bliss or woe: / So dear I love him, that with him all deaths / I could endure, without him live no life."). Eve's romantic love turns into an uncontrollably selfish and almost suicidal attachment to Adam. She would rather selfishly cause his death than have to be without him. In Malfi this is comparable to the actions of the Duchess and Antonio that get out of control. In their first seduction scene they wish to remain "chaste" due to the "naked sword between" them. They end up having multiple children, and the discovery of this by Bosola and thus Ferdinand leads to the capture and demise of the Duchess and then the accidental killing of Antonio. It could be argued that their uncontrolled and unmeasured love for each other acts as a catalyst for the tragedy of the entire play. Antonio's and the Duchess's uncontrollable inability to remain chaste leads to their joint death and downfall. Additionally, the character of Julia's death comes from her undue romantic interest in the Cardinal. The Cardinal, a wholly transactional and evil figure, does not reciprocate the uncontrolled romantic interest Julia shows. Julia's genuine concern and curiosity lead to her death at the hands of her lover ("Come, I must be your secretary and remove this lead from off your bosom: what's the matter?").

Both writers present lust as a powerful and essentially selfish force, which must be controlled to keep order and hierarchy, with Webster's work focusing on the importance of true romantic love and Milton exploring the dangers of lustful disobedience to God. Both Milton and Webster present inappropriate obsessions that lead to tension between characters. This is most obvious in the character of Ferdinand, whose incestuous sexual obsessions with his sister are early established. He is shown to imagine the relations his sister might undertake when he discusses "strong-thighed bargemen" in relation to his sister's sexual life. He flies into a "tempest" after hearing of his sister's child rather than congratulating her and gradually descends into madness. Ferdinand ultimately destroys himself, succumbing to lycanthropy and killing and being killed in the last scene of the play. Ferdinand goes from a serious, menacing presence to an almost comedic and mad figure. His selfish and disgusting lust wholly destroys him; he is driven mad by looking at the true love his sister shares with Antonio and realising he will never have that. His comedic sickness was especially notable in the 2024 Trafalgar Theatre production where Rory Fleck Byrne's lycanthropic Ferdinand crawled across the stage and howled repeatedly loudly. It is clear the uncontrolled and selfish lust he feels destroyed him. In Paradise Lost, Book 9, one of Eve's primary reasons to fall is to become more equal to Adam. She recognises the deficiencies she has when compared to Adam and wishes to rectify them with the fruit ("And render me more equal, and perhaps,  / A thing not undesireable, somtime / Superior: for inferior who is free?"). This is an inherently lustful and disobedient act towards God. Eve forgets God and focuses on her own worldly concerns. This is destructive and selfish, as she essentially forgets her and Adam's wellbeing. Her ambitious lust would be scorned particularly in the early modern 17th century, where ambition was frowned upon, especially when coming from women. A modern reader may not see this lust for equality as severely as it reflects the three waves of feminism that have been experienced by the world since Paradise Lost's publication in 1667.

In conclusion, these works both present love in a wide variety of ways, with different characters containing within them the capacity for selfishness and selflessness. It is frequently shown by both writers that a selfless union to God or a true romantic connection overrules the selfish forms of love experienced on earth. For many, to focus on worldly matters is selfish in the face of an omnipotent God; however, some characters can show their love unselfishly to both God and their companions. In these works love is both the most selfish and destructive but also the most important emotion.  





