'Literature often celebrates the strong bond between human beings.'
In light of this view, compare Milton's portrayal of the relationship between Adam and Eve with Webster's portrayal of the relationship between Antonio and The Duchess. (30)

Both texts comment on human bonds. Particularly, both focus on testing and change, complexity, and divinity. Overall, between these texts, the relationship in Malfi feels much stronger than the one in Paradise Lost and lasts the whole text without perverting from its original state. Both texts also frequently compare attitudes of the time, such as attitudes towards women and attitudes towards marriage, due to the rise of puritanism in England. Overall, these texts examine bonds, but one celebrates much more than the other.

Both Adam and Eve's and Antonio and the Duchesses' relationships are tested throughout the texts and the change of human bonds is a significant topic. In Areopagitica, Milton proposes that virtue should be tested and sees little value in it when 'fugitive and cloistered'. Reading Malfi against this idea, we see that Antonio and the Duchesses' relationship is frequently tested by her brothers. When the bond of the Duchess to her family is tested by her brother Ferdinand, she maintains her will, and this is a celebration of the strong bond of love between her and her family. 'I am Duchess of Malfi still' she maintains her will despite the strong testing of Ferdinand's imprisonment. Throughout Paradise Lost Book IX, Adam and Eve undergo change in their relationship; they begin with a strong and presented as virtuous bond. Later in the text, Adam and Eve become lustful, and Adam is described as having "amorous intent" when he looks at Eve. Under the highly Christian society of early modern England, lustful interests like this would be looked down upon. In Matthew 5:28, it says, "But I say to you that everyone who looks at a woman with lustful intent has already committed adultery with her in his heart." This shows a disdain for the lustful relationships that were brought into Paradise Lost by Adam and Eve's transgressions against God. However, this is somewhat contradicted by the rise of puritanism in the early modern era, which presented a more idealised romance-based version of marriage than the previous marriage for status or arranged marriage. This is supported by Susanne Woods writing on puritanism in her edition of the Poems of Aemlia Lanyer, who wrote on the increasing agency of women under puritanism. Despite the testing, Antonio and the Duchess remain loyal and virtuous to their eventual deaths. The Duchesses' second-to-last line is 'Antonio!' After reawakening from her presumed death, the first and only thing she thinks about it before her final death is Antonio, once again emphasising the bond between her and Antonio. This is another point of comparison with Paradise Lost. One of Eve's thoughts after she eats the apple is of God replacing her with another woman, and she cannot bear this thought. When put in danger, she considers Adam. This is, however, a much darker tone than in Malfi, as here it is out of paranoia and fear rather than eternal love and devotion. Both texts show change in human bonds and Malfi presents an unchanging, eternal and divined love whereas Paradise Lost shows a love that changes from virtuous to sinful acting as a microcosm of the fall.

Both texts explore the complexity of human bonds. In Malfi Antonio and the Duchesses' love, it is compared to the gordian knot: 'Bless, heaven, this sacred gordian which let violence / Never untwine!', which emphasises the strong bond between the central human beings of the text. It is also telling, as the only thing that would later defeat their love was the violence of Bosola. It also comments on complexity, as the Gordian knot was known as so complex and resistant to testing, which suggests the nature of their relationship is complex and unbreakable. Malfi insists that complexity is a strength, as the nature of Antonio and the Duchess is also explicitly complex but strong. The Duchess is the strongest figure in the relationship due to the unusual class distance between the two, at a time when a male would be expected to have more power. This is again more complex than initially thought, as A Godlie Forme of Householde Government (1598) states that a woman may have control over some family affairs while still being subservient to her husband. Malfi's central relationship complicated this and the existing class structure of the time, and while it may not seem outlandish to a modern audience, such a strong and commanding female character would go beyond even the growing positions of women of the time. In Paradise Lost, complexity is frequently portrayed negatively. When describing the movement of Satan in the snake, Milton wrote, 'Curled many a wanton wreath in sight of Eve', describing how Satan curled up to try and get Eve's attention. This associates complexity with evil and insincerity, contrasting the treatment of Malfi's relationship as complex and beautiful. Paradise Lost could also be seen to have a more simplistic portrayal of women as it blames the fall entirely on Eve, which is contrasted by contemporary work such as Aemelia Lanyer's Salve Deus Rex Judaeorum, which pushed some of the blame onto Adam using a more nuanced argument. Where Malfi portrays complexity as beautiful and important, Paradise Lost portrays it as a trait of the evil incarnate.

Both texts compare relationships to divinity. In Malfi, Antonio says, 'And may our sweet affections, like the spheres, be still in motion!' emphasising the virtue of their relationship and the strength and purity of their human bond in the face of darkness-Ferdinand's later treachery. This is also significant due to the contemporary belief that the universe was designed and positioned by God, which therefore states that their relationship was divinely designed. This is an interesting comparison with Paradise Lost, as Adam and Eve's relationship was literally designed by God. While the Duchess and Antonio maintain the divinity in their relationship, Adam and Eve fall and lose their divinity again, moving towards a more lustful attraction. This parallels the Bible story of John 4, where Jesus confronts the woman at the well and tells her how having one satisfactory husband or true love would be more satisfactory than a lustful series of relationships. Malfi's relationship is satisfactory and everlasting, even until death, whereas Adam and Eve's relationship becomes a human one of constant amorous desire. Adam and Eve's bond is shown as unbreakable and strong on the human level but is shown as breaking from divinity and turning to lust and desire, which could question the quality of the relationship at all. Again,  this contrasts with Malfi's, as on both levels the relationship remains strong. Overall, the comparison to divinity mirrors the rest of the bond in these texts, with Malfi's one being much stronger.

In conclusion, these texts both show strong human bonds, but one is portrayed more positively in relation to divinity. Malfi's relationship is strong and repeatedly praised throughout the text as divine and unbreakable, which is proven. Paradise Lost's relationship is also unbreakable, but its breaking of the bond with divinity eventually dooms it to lust and desire rather than pure and virtuous love. With the context of puritanism and heavy religious values, along with the personal context of Milton's beliefs, this makes sense. Malfi may have been seen to present a more radical relationship, but one that is cherished to this day, with the Duchess frequently being celebrated as a brilliant female character transcending her age.

 

Reading this was a pleasure, Sydney. To get the negatives out of the way first, there are a few occasions when your expression is awkward. However, your essay is always clear. There was scope here for a clearer counter-argument. Finally, although you generally do well to explore the relevance of your context, sometimes you drop Bible references in without the necessary discussion.
Still, this aside, this is a thoughtfully engaged, detailed response to the question. Context is a strength and is fruitfully used.
