#separator:tab
#html:false
What percentage of Scotland voted to remain in the EU?	62% of Scots voted to remain in the EU
According to George Robertson, Devolution will [...]	According to George Robertson, Devolution will Kill nationalism stone dead
How many seats did the SNP win in the 2021 Scottish parliament election?	64 /129seatsLargest party.
What was voter turnout for the referendum to have a Welsh Assembly (1997)	50% turnout
What is a constitution according to Heywood (2000)?	
What are the three functions of a constitution?	Establish the duties, powers, limits and functions of government institutionsRegulate the relationships between these institutions . Define the relationship between the state and the individual.
What are the types of constituion?	Codified and uncodified constitutionsUnitary and federal constituions Entrenched and unentrenchedFlexible and rigidMonarchical and RepublicanParliamentary and Presidential
What is a codified constituion?	Key constitutional provisions are collected together in a single legal document Outlines duties, powers and functions of governments. May also include a bill of rights.  Also entrenched
What are the four key features of a codified constituion?	Constitutional provisions are collected within a single legal document. The document is authoritative and constitutes 'higher law'. Constitution stands above statute made by legislature (two tier legal system)The provisions are entrenched. Difficult to amend as process for changing constitution is more difficult or complex than making ordinary laws. It is judiciable - all political bodies are subject to the authority of courts.
What three countries have uncodified constituions	UKNew Zealand Israel
What is an uncodified constituion?	Constitution made up of a variety of different sources. Evolved over time and not been formally codified or entrenched.
What did Philip Norton (1982) say about the nature of uncodified constitutions?	They are in a permenant state of flux.
What are the three key features of uncodified constituions?	Not authoratative. Constitutional laws enjoy the same status as ordinary laws. (Single tier legal system with no higher law)Not entrenched - can be changed by passing a statute law. Can be seen in the UK through Parliamentary sovereignty. Not judiciable - Judges do not have a legal standard enshrined in a written constitution to declare laws 'unconstitutional'.
What is a unitary constitution?	A constitution that concentrates sovereign power in a single bodyExecutive is formed from the legislature
What is a federal constitution?	A constitution that is based on the principles of shared sovereignty,in that there are two relatively autonomous levels of government - regional and national Both possess a range of powers that the other cannot encroach upon.
What is a quasi federal constitution? (Heywood, 2021)	A division of powers between central and regional government, that has some features of federalism without possessing a formal federal structure.
What are the 5 main sources of the UK constitution?	Statute law - made by Parliament. Parliamentary sovereignty implies statutes outrank all other sources of constitution. E.g. Scotland Act (1998), Government of Wales Act (1998), House of Lords Act (1999), Constitutional Reform Act (2005), Dissolution and calling of Parliament Act (2022). Common law - Judge-made law. Precedents. Exists where there are no statutes. Conventions - unwritten understandings about how something should be done. E.g. The Royal Prerogatives, IMR, CMR Works of constituional authority. E.G. Hansard, A.V. Dicey’s Rule of Law or Bagehot’s The English Constitution.Treaties and EU law - NI Protocal
What did Walter Bagehot argue in The English Constitution (1877)	Bagehot distinguished between the 'dignified' (monarchy and the Lords) from the 'efficient' (cabinet and commons)Fusion of powers
What did AV Dicey argue in An Introduction to the Study of the Law and the Constitution (1885)	Defines the twin pillars of the constitution as Parliamentary sovereignty and the Rule of Law. Parliament can make or unmake any law
What are the principles of Parliamentary sovereignty? (Dicey)	Fusion of powers - The government is drawn from Parliament and accountable to it. Parliament can make and unmake any law. - No limits to the scape and scale of Parliaments legislative capacity. Parliament can legislate what it likes. No Parliament may bind or limit the actions of a successor Parliament
Why is the UK constitution not authoratative?	It enjoys the same status as ordinary lawsSingle tier legal system with no higher law
Define entrenched	Something that is firmly established - often through specific legal obstacles to be overcome
15 constitutional reforms that have taken place since 1997	Scotland and Wales Acts (1998)Good Friday Agreement (1998)HRA (1998)House of Lords Act (1999) Elected mayors (1999)Creation of GLA (2000)Freedom of information Act (2000)Constitutional Reform Act (2005)Fixed Term Parliament Act (2011)Wales Act (2011) Scotland Act (2012)Wright reforms (2009)Recall of MPs Act (2015)EU Withdrawl Act (2018)Eu Withdrawl Agreement (2020)Elections Act (2022)Dissolution and Calling of Parliament Act (2022)
How does Fairclough (2014) suggest that the UK can achieve democratic renewal?	Greater decentralisation of powerImproved accountability of politicians both elected and unelectedIncreased participation of the electorate in the political processMore open government. Increased security of rights protection
What do Constituional Conservatives think of the reforms of the last 20 years	Most opposed to the idea of any further constitutional reform. Many constitutional conservatives do not believe that the constitutional reforms of the past 18 years have improved the system They think it has led to greater instability. Many would like to see some of these reforms (e.g. the HRA) repealed.
What do Constituional Radicals think of the reforms of the last 20 years	Those (mainly in the Liberal Democrats and certain pressure groups) who do not believe that the past 25 years of constitutional reform and innovation have been insufficiently radical,The UK needs wholesale rather than piecemeal constitutional reform. They have adopted a maximalist approach - full codification for the constitution of the UK with full federalism and an entrenched Bill of Rights for the UK.
What is pooled sovereignty?	The sharing of sovereignty between a core centre and a periphery.The most commonly quoted example of pooled sovereignty is the European Union with its emphasis both on Supranationalism and subsidiarity.
Why do some call the UK a 'quasi-federal' constituion?	The Scottish parliament retains certain powers (devolved matters) in which the UK Parliament has no say. It has no say because the Scotland Act 1998, devolved these matters to the Scottish Parliament.This has led to what some commentators have referred to as a quasi-unitary or a quasi-federal constitution.
Who coined the term elective dictatorship and in what year?	Lord Hailsham in 1976Elected government with working majority and whips office is a five year dictatorship
What is constitutionalism?	The belief and practice of exercising power according to the established principles of the constitution and the rule of law. Those exercising power are subject to the rule of law and are not above it.
What are the 3 benefits of the UK's uncodified constitution?	Flexibility Democratic rule - Sovereignty rests in the elected Commons, not unelected judges. Effective government - The uncodified constitution is flexible and easy to change. (Dunblane, Coronavirus Act)Organic constitution has been 'tested by time' and has proven to work.
What are the 4 disadvantages of the uncodified constituion?	Uncertainty - Difficult to know what the constitution says. Huge range of documents. Excessively centralised in the hands of Parliament. Lack of checks and balances - elective dictatorship. (Elections Act 2022)Weak protection for rights and civil liberties. (Public Order Act)
What are the 5 reasons for codifying the UK constituion?	Clarity - reduce confusion as all constitutional rules will be defined in one document. Limited government - safeguard from elective dictatorship by creating checks and balances. Safeguard constituion from interference from government of the day. Neutral interpretation - Will be policed by senior judges who are neutral and impartial arbiters to ensure that the constitution is properly upheld by public Protect rights - Individual liberty would be better protected. Education and citizenship - create a sense of political identity by highlighting central values.
What are the 4 reasons against codifying the UK constituion?	Too rigid - Codified constituions are more rigid and therefore easily become outdated. Will only codify a set of rights that were important at the timeUnnecessary - Improving democracy or strenghening checks and balances may be better ways of restraining government. Judicial tyranny - Government will be beholden to unelected, unrepresentative and unaccountable judges. Will not solve attacks on democracy -According to Meg Russel, the assault on rights and liberties is not a solely British disease, but rather a global infection
What did the House of Lords Act (1999) do?	Removed all but 92 hereditary peers
What does the House of Lords Appointments Commission (2000) do?	to recommend individuals for appointment as non-party-political life peersto vet nominations for life peers, including those nominated by the UK political parties, to ensure the highest standards of propriety.
What are the positives of the reforms that have happened to the house of lords since 1998?	The Lords remain free of electoral limits so offer impartial advice. The Lords are now far more assertive in holding government to account as they now have more legitimacyIt's composition can more accurately reflect the electorate due to commission.If the chamber was fully elected, it might expect more political parties and cause gridlock. 'yah-boo' politics.
Why might House of Lords reform have been ineffective?	Remains wholly unelected, with no public accountability. Cannot properly check government power. Too much power to Prime MinistersProne to corruption - Michelle Mone, Boris Johnson's father.
How effective has the Freedom of Information (2000) Act been?	PositivesNegativesDoes it go far enough?                 Freedom of Information improves accountability. Gives public the right to acces files from government bodies.Used to expose black spider letters and the expenses scandalIt has led to ministers using covert or  unofficial methods to communicate controversial behaviour. E.g. WhatsApp, Matt Hancock. When you submit an FOI request to a public authority, you are supposed to receive a response in twenty working days. But increasingly, public authorities are not responding at all.  Offering no response whatsoever – a tactic known as stonewalling – puts requesters in legal limbo because without a refusal, they cannot fully enter the appeals process. It has been argued that The Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea made extensive use of stonewalling to shield itself from transparency following the Grenfell fire. And the (central) government has recently lost a legal battle over deliberate delays to requests for information by, in particular, journalists, who use FOI a lot.Government has the ability to reject requests if they are 'not in the public interest' or threatening to national security. Information commissioner can't compel government and public bodies to release information. Full of exemptions - many requests are refused due to cost, inadequate information. e.g the crown The FOI Act also fails to cover private companies contracted to carry out public sector work. This includes Serco and G4S, undertaking important security work, companies operating some of our hospitals, and the much maligned train operators, Thameslink and Southern Rail. This became a big issue with the collapse of Carillion, the infrastructure services provider. It should have been easier to find out information about the state of its business and its relationship with governmentDoes not
What did the 2005 Constitutional Reform Act do?	Established the Supreme Court by removing law lords from HOLRoles of Lord Chancellor was split up into 3 distinct roles. Justice secretary, president of courts and England and Wales, the Lord Chief Justice. Removes the power of the Lord Chancellor to make judicial appointments. Judicial Appointments Commission ensured independence in the appointment of judges.  Clearer seperation of poweres
How successful has the 2005 Constitutional reform Act been?	Positives NegativesNeeds further improvement                 Newly independent judges are farm more willing to check the legislature and executive.JAC has meant better representation of women and minorities The position of Lord Chancellor has existed for centuries and should not have been reformed in such an ill thought out wayThe Supreme Court is merely a geographical move from one building to another. Does not give any extra powers and make it 'supreme' like the one in the US.Highest justices in the land but as Parliament is sovereign, they have no powers to restrict the government
How many amendments have there been to the US constitution	Only 27 in the history in US constitutionObama wanted to introduce gun control after Sandy Hook in 2012, but high barriers meant he could not. Requires 2/3 of both Representatives and Senate
What were the 4 Wright reforms?	Chair of select committees are elected by the House through secret ballot, not appointed by the whipsMembers of departmental and similar committees should be elected from by secret ballotBackbench business is scheduled by the newly created Backbench Business Committee. They control the agenda for 35 days a year An e-petitions system was introduced. If an e-petition achieves over 100,000 signatures, it can be considered by the BbBC to be debated in the House.
How effective have the Wright reforms been?	PositivesDoes it go far enough?                 Select committees have been revitalised, with many effective chairs being more prepared to challenge the government. For example Foreign Affairs Select held Raab to account for being on holiday during evacuation in Afghanistan. The report says 'the withdrawl from Afghanistan was a disaster and a betrayal of our allies that will damage the UK's interests for years to come' (2022)The e-petition process has become a huge success and is used widelyNot all select committees can choose their own chair, as was seen in 2020 with the Liason CommitteeBackbench Committee debates do not compel the government to act. They are merely an opportunity for MPs to express their views
Why and when was EVEL scrapped?	July 2021To remove unnecessary complication. It introduces up to 8 additional legislative stages during the initial passage of a bill through the Commons
Powers of Devolved institutions diagram	
What is asymmetrical devolution?	A form of devolution that operates differently in different regions, with no common pattern of devolved powers and responsibilities within the state
What were the results for the Scottish independence referendum and what was the turnout?	Vote to stay in the UK is 55% to 45% of the vote on 85% turnout
What did the 1998 Scotland Act do?	Established a Scotish Parliament An executive with devolved primary legislative power in some areas, in a reserved power model (matters not specifically set out to be reserved are assumed to be devolved). Income tax varying powers ±3p.
What did the 2012 Scotland Act do?	Extension of tax powers - tax varying powers ±10p and devolution of some additional taxes. More borrowing powersControl over landfill tax and stamp duty.
What did the 2016 Scotland Act do?	Extends more powers over taxationRecognises the Scottish Parliament as a permenant constituional arrangment, which cannot be abolished without a referendum
What did the 2017 Wales Act do	Gave the Assembly new income tax varying powers of ±10p as well as more primary legislative powers. Recognises Welsh Assembly and Government as a permenent constituional arragement that cannot be abolished without a referendum
When was the Welsh Assembly changed to the Welsh Senedd	2020
Policy differences in Scotland, Wales and NI	ScotlandWalesNI                 Differences in income tax. E.g. lowest rate is at 19% rather than 20%Tuition fees abolished in 2008Reintroduction of free long term care for the elderly in 2002.Kept Educational Maintenance Allowance for young people staying in schoolFree prescriptions (2011)Reduced voting age for Scottish Parliament Elections to 16Abolished the 'bedroom tax'Introduction of a minimum unit price for alcohol to tackle harmful levels of alcohol consumption in 2018Health expenditure around £11billion. One third of all Scottish Budget. 11% higher per capita in comparison to England. Spending on social services is 25% higher per capita than elsewhere in the UK Differences in Covid 19 resttrictionsKept educational maintanence Allowance for young people staying on at schoool. Free prescriptions (2007)Reduced voting age for Welsh Parliament Elections to 16Free prescriptions (2010)
What is the Barnett formula	Calculates the block grant given to each devolved administration. Tries to give each country the same amount of money per capita
Why did Andy Burnham challenge the UK Government in 2020?	Goverment tried to impose tier 3 Covid restrictions on Manchester without sufficient financial support. Shows locally elected mayors can hold government to account
Has devolution been a sucess?	Yes No                 Has brought democracy closer to the people. Devolution has dramatically increased the desire for Scottish independence. Threatens to break up the UKDevolved bodies are very popular. Permenent constituional arrangments and shouldn't be abolished without a referenudmAsymmetric devolution. Makes the whole process imbalanced and uncertainPeace in NI for 20 yearsHuge improvement over the 'troubles' where 4000 diedSuspended and ruled from Westminister often. Was suspended betwen 2002 to 2007 and between 2017-2020 According to the BBC, Stormont has been without a functioning gov for 35% of it's lifespan.DUP refused to assent to the election of a speaker as part of a protest against the NI protocol. Metro mayors create greater regional identity in England They are able to make strategic decisions and challenge government e.g. Andy Burnham Turnout is extremely low. According to Heywood, averages around 29% for metro mayor electionsWelsh interest in devolution has increased since the very narrow referendum result. Only 50.1% voted to create a Welsh Assembly (1997). Now a great success, Now called Welsh ParliamentThere is no English Assembly despite the fact that 83% of the UK lives in England. Evel was abolished because it was not a satisfactory solution
Arguments against the extension of devolution to regions or an English Parliament	Unnecessary Duplication/ bureacracy. E.g. NE Referendum   The relative weakness of some regional identities.     The potential complications of the relationship between the UK and English Government and Parliament.     Lack of demand. - in 2012 mayoral referendums. 2004 NE Assembly referendum    Inevitable unevenness between the different parts of the UK.
Why should we have an entrenched, codified constituion and bill of rights?	Would prevent rushed, poorly drafted changes.     Would offer greater protection to the rights of citizens.    Would be more easily understood and accessible.    Would limit the power of   Government, preventing elected dictatorship.     Would bring UK into line with other modern democracies.
Why should we not entrench or codify?	Would reduce flexibility in a crisis.     Would limit the ability of the constitution to evolve over time.    Would limit the power of government, preventing necessary reform.    Would grant too much power to judges.     Is unnecessary as the current system has been proven to work over time.
Proposals for further reform	House of Lords: Wholly or partly elected chamber with hereditary peers removed.    Electoral reform: Electoral reform for Westminster elections.    Devolution: Transfer of further powers to Scottish Parliament, Welsh Assembly and Northern Ireland Assembly; or devolution to England.    Human Rights Act: power to strike down laws, and entrenchment of HRA.
Why were plans for an elected House Of Lords dropped?	Rebellion of 91 Conservative MPs. Lib dems retaliated by blocking the legislation designed to reduce the number of MPs from 650 to 600.
When did Thatcher abolish the GLC and why?	Abolished in 1986.Annoyed Thatcher by having a sign outside GLC proclaiming number of unemployed in London. Thought that they were 'Left wing extremists' and 'big spenders of other peoples money' 'loony left'. called for dialogue with the IRAPromised to abolish in 1983 manifesto
What are the arguments in favour of English regional devolution?	more efficient to have the regions concerned with policy delivery involved in the formulation of policy,relieve the burden on central government.bringing the government closer to the people means policies can be designed to fit the needs of the people in different regionsThe governmental structures we have now are in need of remodelling: local government was designed to fit the needs of the mid-nineteenth century and central government expanded in the middle of the twentieth to meet the demands of that time.Since the (unelected) Regional Development Agencies were scrapped in 2012 there is a lack of strategic co-ordination across many regions (except London, and Greater Manchester for example) with regards to economic development, regeneration, plans to boost employment, and so forth.It would provide a counter-point to London-centricism; it is difficult to think of another polity that is so dominated economically and politically by its nation’s biggest city.The regions in England need to have a platform that will give their area a voice enabling them to lobby central government for increased funding.Resolve the West Lothian questionSuccess in Scotland and Wales shows it should be replicated in Engalnd
What are the arguments against further English regional devolution?	Would create more unnecessary bureacracyGovernment would not be brought closer to the people unless the devolved powers assume real powers – as in Scotland.Regional assemblies would do little to improve economic performance within the regions.Claims that devolution would usher in a new form of politics have not been borne out by experiences in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.West Loathian Question
How are Sunak and Hunt creating a 'quiet devolution revolution'? How large is the devolution deal for the NE?	"The current government has steadily worked towards its goal of 'levelling up' by transferring further powers out of Whitehall to England's regional units. According to the ifg""The proportion of England covered by devolution deals has gradually increased since 2014. If all the negotiated deals are implemented, 36% of England’s land area, 52% of the population, and 58% of its economic output will be covered by devolution."" £1.4 Billion devolution deal for the North East Increasing the powers of areas regarded as the 'trailblazers' of devolution. E.g. West Midlands, Manchester. Buses are being placed under public control"
What did the Supreme Court Rule in November 2022 in regards to Scottish independence?	Any referendum on Scottish independence requires the consent of Westminister
What is the sewel convention?	Sewel convention: UK parliament will not normally legislate on devolved matters without the consent of the devolved governments  However, has been challenged by Brexit vote, as Scotlandand Northern Ireland voted to remain in the EU
How does Westminister remain dominant over Scotland?	Section 35 of Scotland states the Westminster and scotland secretary have veto powers:Gender Recognation Act where the Westminster vetoed it signifying the Hollyrood’s power limitations in relation to Westminster. (Westminster supremacy)
What are some of Sadiq Khan's new initiatives/powers?	Extending the ULEZ to the North circular. Introducing free school meals for the 2023/2024 academic year for primary school chlidren. Will cost 130mNew 'superloop' network of London buses - 6m investment
How many years since 1998 has Stormont been without a functioning government?	10 years, around 35% of the time according to the BBC
What was turnout in the 2021 Scottish Parliament election?	Only 63.5% - this might suggest that more proportional systems have not led to greater participation. However, these are second order elections. First order elections would obviously have a hgiher turnout.
How many people voted in favour of further Welsh devolution in 2011?	
What was the outcome of the 2011 Welsh devolution referendum?	Strong vote in favour of Further Welsh Devolution(63.49% in favour) Very different to last referendum in 1997 where only 50% of the electorate voted in favour of a Welsh Assembly
What are the 4 Principles of the UK constitution	Parliamentary sovereigny Constituional monarchy The rule of law Fusion of powers
How do the different sources of the constitution interact with each other?	Statute law supersedes all sources Common Law cannot contradict existing statute law, but once established has equal authority. Supersedes authoratative works and conventions Authoratative works and conventions are not binding but considered strong guidance and often consulted when interpreting the constituion
Is the UK constitution fit for purpose?	Fit for purposeNot fit for purpose                 Flexible - Constituion is not entrenched. This means Parliament can change laws to adapt to changing circumatances. For example, devolution to counteract nationalism in Scotland and Wales Uncertainty - Difficult to know what the constitution says. Much confusion. They do not tell governments what they can and can't do  Democratic rule - Supreme constituional authority rests with the elected commons. Therefore changes to the constituion happen due to democratic pr Weak protection for rights - There is nothing to stop tyranny of the majority/overriding of rights. E.g. Terrorism legislationHistory and tradition - Accumulated wisdom of the past. Gives it an organic character  Over centralised - Concentration of power and over-mighty executed. Power is not seperated and centralised like other countriesEffective government - Absence of an entrenched quickly makes it easy for government to take decisive action. Not like America. Elective dictatorship - Uk governments can act as they please.
How effective has the HRA been?	EffectiveNot effectiveHas it gone far enough?                 Greater awareness of rights. Judicary protects rights Declarations of incompatibility prevent executive from eroding rightsHas created a litiguous culture (too ready to take legal action). Gives rights to the undeserving - Abu Hamza, Abu Qatada. Unelected judges  Has not been entrenched so can be abolished. E.g. Raab. Judges cannot 'strike down' legislation but can only declare it incompatible. Government can derrogate from the HRA. E.g. the Prevention of Terrorism Act
How effective has house of Lords reform been? House of Lords Act [...]?	How effective has house of Lords reform been? House of Lords Act 1999?                   EffectiveNot effectiveHas not gone far enough                 Impartial - Lords remain free of electoral limits so can offer impartial advice. Removal of hereditaries = more assertiveNot being elected means that there is no whip system that would cause gridlock Has not made the Lords smaller - over 800 Lords. Gives too much power to PM  -  Petter Cruddas incidentRemains unelected and unaccountable. Therefore means it has to back down against government. Elected house of lords would give a democratic mandate
How effective has the Recall of MPs Act been?	EffectiveNot effective                 Recall ensures MPs stay aware of their obligations to their constituents. Indiscretions do have consequences. E.g. Fiona Onasanya/ Chris Davies Genuine recall would be started by electorates. Still requires the permission of Parliament.  Boris Johnson tried to stop the standards committee from subjecting Patterson to a suspension.
Should we codify the constitution?	head1head2                 Clear rules - Collected in a single document means less confusion. More certainty that can be enforced Rigidity - Entrenched laws can become outdated and unable to be changed Limited government - Solution against elective dictatorship by proecting constitution.  Unnecessary - There are better ways to limit government. E.g. new checks and balances.  Neutral interpretation - Policied by senior judges. Impartial constitutional arbiters.Judicial tyranny - Unelected and unaccountable. Also may be biased for values of senior judges. Not socially representativeEducation and citizenship - Clearer sense of political identity and central values of the system. No consensus - No public demand for codification and what a codified constituion would look likeRights protection - Individual liberties can be protectedCodify a set of rights that were important at the time
How did the UK's flexible constitutuion help introduce gun control in 1997? How is this different to America's gun stagnation?	In the UK there are no entrenched laws. So after the Dunblane massacre (16 killed), the Snowdrop Campaign petitioned the government to introduce the Firearms Amendment Act 1997. This banned handguns except for a very limited set of reasons. Despite countless shootings in America (Sandy Hook, 2012)US second amendment means US citizens have rights to bear arms. Demorats want to introduce gun controls.  Change of constituions requires 2/3 of HOR and Senate. This makes it virtually impossible
What is the difference between a presidential and parliamentary system?	Presidential - Executive is elected seperately. Seperation of powersParliamentary - Executive and legislature is drawn from parliament and accountable to it. Fusion of powers
What is the Ponosby Rule?	A constitutional convention that dictated that any international treaty had to be laid before the House of Commons 21 days before ratification. It was named after Arthur Posonby, a Labour Party Minister.
How is devolution different from federalism?	Devolution refers to when powers are delegated to specific regions. Sovereignty does not change. Ultimate legal authority remains in the centre. In a federal system, sovereignty is divided. Ultimate power is split and has not merely been delegated
How does the COVID-19 Pandemic show devolution divergencies in action?   Devolution saw an excellent case study in COVID-19. Health policies are devolved to the governments of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. This has meant that the devolved areas have acted differently to each other in their efforts to try to combat the virus. For example:   Lockdowns – Whilst all the four nations went into the original lockdown on the same date (23.03.20) subsequent restrictions were different:   Following the initial lockdown schools began to reopen for students in England on the 1st June. This did not happen until the 29th of June in Wales and the 11th of August in Scotland. During the third lockdown in 2021, schools returned in England on the 8th March 2021. However, in Scotland students did not return until after the Easter Break.   In England, the second lockdown did not begin until the 31st October 2020. In Scotland, this system was based on levels, with different levels having different requirements for lockdown which started on the 2nd November. In Wales, the ‘circuit breaker’ lockdown started on the 14th October.   Facemasks – Scotland introduced facemasks in public areas after England. Scotland made face coverings compulsory in shops and public transport from the 22nd June 2020. However, in England this had already been introduced in May 2020.   Vaccine Passports – The controversial notion of COVID passes was introduced much earlier in Scotland and Wales than in England. In Scotland Vaccine Passports were introduced in September 2021. This required proof of vaccination for entry to nightclubs and large events. This was introduced in Wales in October 2021. However, for England, this was only voted on by the UK Parliament the 15th December.	
	
How are Welsh Assembly members divided between FPTP and CPL?	60 members in Total 40  FPTP 20 CPL
What does the Lords Reform Act 2014 do?	Allows Lords to retire or resign, which was impossible before. Excludes Lords who commit crimal offences resulting in jail sentences of 1 year+. Provisions to exclude members who do not attend for a whole parliamentary session. This was a private members bill.
What constitututional reforms does the Brown Commission (A New Britain: Renewing our Democracy and Rebuilding our Economy, 2022) recommend?	Embed into law the duties of Government - too much of the UK constitution relies on convention. Should be made explicit what are the roles of central government. Constitutionally enshrined rights like education, healthcare, adequate housing Devolve more power to local communities - More tax raising powers, legislative powers to drive growth and investment. Devolve more powers to Sotland, Wales and NI - Strengthen the Sewel convention by giving the second chamber the power to block legislation without the consent of devolved lefislatures.  More co-operation between governments through a 'Council of Nations and Regions' where governments can meet.  New standards and ethics procedures - More rules on donations. A new code of conduct and creation of independent ethics commission to investigate breeches. Replace House of Lords with smaller democratic second chamber comprised of 200 members.
What are the two forms of devolution in England?	Creation of GLA (Greater London Assembly) in 2000Creation of Metro Mayors - London, Birmingham, Liverpol, Tees Valley, etc.
What did the Northern Irish Protocol do?	Negotiated as a part of the Brexit agreement, guarantees Northern Ireland’s place within the Customs Union and Single Market of the European Union, and is recognised as part of international law. As a consequence of Brexit the fact that two regulatory environments must have a border between them means an effective border has had to established in the Irish sea.
2022 Stormont (Northern Irish Assembly election)	
Evaluate the view that devolution has been a success.	head1head2                 Has maintained the integrity of the United Kingdom. Compromise. Has not led to the disolution of the UK as John Major argued. Scotland voted to remain in 2014 (55%)  Strong support for devolution e.g. in 2011 63% voted in favour of further Welsh devolution. - Support for Scottish Independence has been gaining steadily.  Scotland was forced out of the EU. 62% in Scotland voted to remain, depsite Better Together arguing that the only way to remain would be through EU membership. Support for indepdence is increasing in Wales and reunification of Ireland looks likely as Sinn fien is now the largest and Ireland remains in EU single market and customs union. Secured peace in NI - After decades of the troubles, the good friday agreement ended it with impressive 71% voting in favour. Conflict persists - Huge polarisation. 1/3 of the time Stormont is not running.  - Elected mayors have improved accountability, created a further layer of representation, and brought control closer to the people.  E.g. Sadiq Khan was able to demand the resignation of Cressida Dick. Introduce ULEZ. Ben Houchen Tees Valley is aiding with the governments 'levelling up agenda' by creating freeports. - Lack of support. in 2012, 9 metropolitan areas voted against further devolution.  - 78% voted against the NE Assembly in 2004.  Only 34%Turnout in the London mayor referendum.  - Assymetrical  devolution.
Evalute the view that devolution has not gone far enough in the four nations of the UK.  Mock paper question 2022	Has gone too farHas not gone far enough                  Devolution is threatening the breakup of the UK. Many scots want to suceed.  - The SNP is threatening to hold the next election as a de facto referendum on independence.  - 2014 indyref verdict was that 45% voted to remain as part of the UK. But support for independence has been growing.  Devolution has meant that the UK still remains a unitary state.  - The UK Parliament still has the right to override Scottish legislation. For example, the government blocked Hollyrood's Gender Recognition Bill.  - The supreme court ruled that Scotland could not hold another independence referendum without the consent of Westminister.  - Means that Scotland is not given the chance for self determination.  - Arguably support for indepdence is also diminishing. - Devolution is not necessary in England  - Engand makes up 84% of the UK. 533 out of 650 seats in parliament are English. The government tried to introduce EVAL but it hardly made any difference. The SNP try and avoid voting on England only matters.  - Also, where there is popular demand, the government has extended devolution to areas across England through metro mayors like Khan and Burnham.  And the GLA.  Further devolution would only replicate the Westminister Parliament and create another layer of unnecessary bureacracy. - Still does not address the WEst Loathian question.  - Many areas in England are still not covered by devolution, there should be an english parliament. Walesdata2Northern Irelanddata2
Evaluate the view that devolution is in danger of undermining the unity of the UK.	Is threatening the UK Is not.                  'The Union is threatened by continuing demands for independence.  - Rising Welsh nationalism. Plaid Cymru is now the third largest party.  - More Welsh people want to emphasise their 'Welshness' as opposed to their 'britishness'. E.g. Welsh has become compulsory - Brexit has created huge divisions within the UK. This is the real threat to the unity of the nation, not devolution. The four nations are actually stronger together.  - David Cameron promised 'devo-max'. Scotland voted majority in favour of remaining in the union.  - Constitution remains unitary.  - Much less support for independence after the scandal came to light about improper spending of donations  designated for Scottish independence. 'Tensions and inequalities creates as policies diverge between devolved bodies - over health, education, or tax for instance'.  - Basic rate of income tax is 1p less in Scotland.  - Free prescriptions in the devolved bodies.  - Scotland offers free higher education  - Significant policy divergences during Covid 19. 'policy divergences reflect local democracy, whilst mainining the integrity of the UK.'  - These are only in areas where the devolved bodies are given jurisdiction. They are not allowed to legislate on reserved matters. For example, the Supreme Court ruled that the SNP could not hold a referendum on independence without consent from Westminister.   - Asymmentric devolution has created resentment and frustration amongst the English. Led to the creation of EVEL.  - Many people think that it is unfair. - This has been addressed by English devolution. E.g. the GLA and metro mayors..  Their might not be the demand for it. For example, in 2004 78% voted against a NE assembly.  - In 2012, 9 areas rejected in referendums the opportunity to have a mayor.  Devolution is a 'process not an event'.
Evluate the view that there are more advantages to having a codified consitution than remaining with an uncodified constitution	Advantages of uncodified constitution.  - Flexibility  - Strong government e.g. Dunbale.  - Democratic rule. Not himpered by unelected judges. Advantages of a codified constituion  - Certainty and rights protection.  Check on government power Neutral interpretiation.                  data1data2data1data2data1data2
