#separator:tab
#html:false
What is the Salibsury convention?	The convention that the House of Lords does not try to block any legislation promised in the manifesto of the governing party
What was Lloyd George's budget 1909	Massively increased taxes on aristocrats in order to pay for War Welfare stateWas opposed by the House of Lords. Led to the creation of the Parliament Act, 1911 which limited the power of the House Of Lords to delay and amend legislation. Can no longer veto.
Which Act repealed the Fixed Term Parliament Act (2011)	The Dissolution and Calling of Parliament Act (2022)
What is standing order 14?	Gives government control of timetable Standing Order Number 14 states that the government’s business has precedence at every sitting. In practice, it allows the government to decide what you debate, when you debate it, and how long you debate it for – with just a few exceptions. This gives a huge amount of power to the executive and makes it very difficult for the opposition to hold them to account.  And that’s the argument in favour of Standing Order Number 14: think of the swift action of the Coronavirus Act 2020. But the downside is something like the EU (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020 – hugely constitutionally important and incredibly complicated – and pushed through with just three days of debate in the House of Commons.  Alision Young thinks that it should be abolished - The government reduced the time available to discuss the EU withdrawl bill.
What are the 4 roles of MPs	Represent constituents and deal with grievances. They are expected to scrutinise the government. MPs are also expected to debate legislation and the great issues of the day. Legitimise legislation and represent popular consent
Who is in charge of Parliament (Meg Russel)	Too simplistic too assume that government controls Parliament, even if a government has a majority. When it comes to policy, Russell argues government backbenchers are in charge. Because they are the ones who usually provide the majority, without them, the government can't govern. They are not simply 'lobby fodder' or 'nodding dogs'. There are constant conversations between backbenchers and government around what backbenchers are willing to put up with. Whips let ministers know when backbenchers are not happy and likely to rebel.For example, Sajid Javid u turned on vaccine passports after it was seen to be unpopular with backbenchers. Rishi sunak backed down on housebuilding targets after unrest amongst backbenchers. MPs do not want to lose their seats, so will rebel on policy that angers their core base.
What are some of the different Parliamentary factions in the Conservative party?	Northern Research Group European Research GroupCommon Sense Group Net Zero GroupThe 'nat cons' The ultra free marketeers
What is the role of the opposition?	Oppose and criticise the policies of government. e.g. PMQs. Opposition given 17 days a year to raise issues for debatePresent an alternative government
How many days a year are the opposition given to raise issues for debate?	20 in total 17 for labour party 3 for SNP
What is 'pairing'?	An arrangement between two MPs of opposing parties to not vote in a particular division, enabling an MP to be absent without affecting the result of the vote, as they effectively cancel each other out
Why was Bercrow controversial?	Accusations that he was a 'Remoaner' In 2017, he told students at reading university he was a remainer. Led to allegations he was not impartial.  He stopped May from holding a third 'meaningful vote' on her Brexit deal - a decision that forced her to abandon the agreement she spent months negotiating. Hastened her demise. On several occasions he allowed backbenchers to take control of the Commons timetable to block a 'no-deal Brexit'. Allowed backbenchers to amend a motion to force ministers to publish their Brexit stratergy much earlier than they had wanted.  Bullying  Found guilty of bullying House of Commons staff by the standards watchdog and banned from holding a pass. Concluded that Bercrow is a 'serial bulySeveral Commons clerks alleged he verbally harassed them. One was left with PTSD. His former private secretary, Angus Sinclair told Newsnight in 2019 that Bercrow tried to physically intimidate him. He also bullied his former private secretary Kate Emms. Called leader of commons Andrea Leadsom 'useless' and a 'stupid woman' in the chamber
How many hereditary peers are there in the House of Lords	92
How many Lords Spiritual are there in the House of Lords	26
What is the Salisbury Convention?	The convention whereby the Lords does not block or delay legislation included in a governments manifesto
What are select committees?	Departments responsible for scrutinising the work of government departments. There are also some that take on a wider remit.
What are the powers of the Commons	Supreme legislative power. The power to approve governent's budget and any money bills. Departmental select committees.Question ministers and PM (PMQs)Represent people. Legitimise the government and legislation Remove governments - VONC.
What are the powers of the lords	It acts mainly as a revising chamber, proposing amendments to government legislation, which it is up to the government to decide whether to accept or reject      Delay bills for up to one year. The Lords have Question Time and every government department has a spokesperson who must respond to questions.  Vote on statutory instrumentsCannot delay money bills or bills in manifesto.
What proportion of the lords are crossbenchers?	1/4 of the Lords are crossbenchers. 185 LordsTend to be less loyal as not seeking party approval
Which Lords have served in governments?	Lord David Frost as chief Brexit negotiator under Johnson. Peter Mandelson as business secretary
What is the committee stage of passing a bill?	When the details of the bill are scrutinised line by line. Carried out by a public bill committee, consisting of about 18 MPs. May also be considered by a committee of the whole house. Most amendments are made at this stage and new provisions can be added
How are bills passed? (Legislative Process)	
What are the six functions of Parliament?	Legislation Representation LegitimacyRecruiting and maintaining the government Debate Scrutiny
What is a private members bill?	A bill that is proposed by an MP who is not a member of the government, usually through an annual ballotUsually only successful with government supportThe National Autistic Society's 'I Exist' Campaign worked successfully to persuade MPs to back Cheryl Gillians Autism ActCouncils and NHS have a duty of care for people with autism
What are Public Bill Committees	Committees made up of MPs from all sides of the House responsible for reviewing legislation in the HOC. They have an in-built government majority in proportion to the majority in the House. They propose amendments - most are accepted. But opposition amendments are very unlikely to be acceptedThere are also clause selection and time limit mechanisms (Kangaroo and Guillotine)
What was Tony Blair's first defeat?	Backbench MPs defeated Blair's plans to extend the detention of terrorist suspects to 90 days without charge. This was his first ever defeat in November 2005 (post election government)· 291 vote for 90-day amendment; 322 against  · 49 Labour MPs rebel
Under the coalition, Parliament was the most rebellious in the post war era. Coalition MPs rebelled in [...] votes	Under the coalition, Parliament was the most rebellious in the post war era. Coalition MPs rebelled in 35% votes
How many defeats were inflicted by the Lords in the period 2017-2019?	69 defeats inflicted by the Lords
Why did Caroline Lucas use Parliamentary privilege?	Lucas’s maiden speech, (2010) used parliamentary privilege to name the litigious company Trafigura in a case that saw toxic waste dumped in Africa. Trafigura used liabel laws to evade accountability
Why did Peter Hain use Parliament Parliamentary privilege? (2018)	"Topshop Owner, Philip Green used NDAs and Court injunctions to hide accusations of unlawful sexual misconduct and racist behaviour. He was  the businessesman at the heart of Britain's #MeToo scandal. Peter Hain used Parliamentary privilege to expose himThe Telegraph had been investigating allegations of bullying, intimidating and sexual harassment but was prevented from publishing the story"
How was Jimmy Saville protected from Prosecution?	Liabel laws protected the Sun from exposing his Transgressions, despite having solid evidence. Meant that the expose was dropped and Saville was never brought to justice
What are Urgent Questions?	If an urgent matter arises, MPs may apply to ask an urgent question. If the speaker is satisfied that the question is urgent, the relevant government minister must explain what the government is doing.Huge surge in urgent questions, 307 in 2017-2019. Bercow was far more willing to grant them
What are written questions and letters?	Letters sent by MPs to ministers asking for information Ministers must respond to letters they recieve from MPs and peers
What is 'Humble Address'	A message to the monarchUsed to table motions and call for papers from departments. Understood to be binding on the commons. Labour used the procedure in 2017 to force the release of the 2017 Universal Credit Studies and in 2018 to force the government to publish some secret Brexit files
According to Democratic Audit , what proportion of Bill Committee members have specialist expertise	3/5s. Shows that there will be quality in their suggestions. 99% of ministerial amendments at the commitee stage were successful (2015)But less than 1% of opposition proposals are successful
What is the liason committee?	Brings together all 35 chairs of select committees to question the PM. 2x a year. Conducts scrutiny. E.g. in May 2020, the Liason committee questioned Johnson on handling of Pandemic and Dominic Cummings.
How have the current generation of ministers grown used to avoiding scrutiny?	According to the IFG Expectations of Parliamentary scrutiny have fallen. Major policies would undergo weeks of scrutiny in Public Bill Committees. E.g. The Crimal Justice and Imigration Act underwent 24 committee sittings. Illegal Migration bill will recieve 12 hours of detailed scrutiny in front of the Committee of the Whole House.The current generation of Ministers have grown used to avoiding scrutiny. Brexit and Covid have made fast legislation the norm. But, we are no longer in crisis and rushed policies are badLess detailed scrutiny will mean that legislation will be worse. Rushed. No identifying unintended consequences and potential problems. The Lords will feel they have to scrutinise. Bad for democracy.
Which 2 acts curtail the power of the Lords	Parliament Act 1911Parliament Act 1949
Why was Lebvedev's appointment to the House of Lords Controversial?	He was the son of  former KGB agent Alexander LebvedevHouse of Lords Appointment Commission advised against it. But, Johnson did it anyways.
Things to know about the committee stage	They have an in built government majority. Committee members are whippedOpposition members can propose amendments. However, only around 0.5% of opposition amendments are accepted.
What are statutory instruments?	Statutory Instruments (SIs) laws that can be passed by the executive having been pre-authorised by another Statute. They do not require passing a new act.  They are also referred to as secondary, delegated or subordinate legislation.  They are subject to minimal Parliamentary oversightBut, they are subject to judicial reviewMany COVID measures were statutory instruments. They can be abused - the Retained EU Law Bill gives ministers blanket powers to change any EU Law or regulation still residing on the EU statute book, without the need for further legislation. These Henry VIII bill allows 'government by decree'. The government can change anything it pleases.
What two things can the Lords Veto	The Lord retains the right to veto any commons attempt to remove a High court, court of appeal or supreme court judge. This is to safeguard the independence of the judiciary. The Lords can also veto any bill that seeks to suspend elections or extend the life of a Parliament.
How does the ECJ still have power in the UK	Trade and co-operation agreement means that we have to abide by European standards to trade with them. The ECJ is the final arbiter under the Windsor Framework Difference between de facto and de jure sovereignty. In principal the government could bonfire regulations but the 'brussels effect' means that doing so would be economic self harm
Why might PMQs not be effective?	PM can lie and not answer the question asked. They can escape the question with a political response. Encourages 'yah boo' Punch and Judy politics. Meerly jeers and hJohnson - Jimmy Saville Accusation, 'fastest growth in the G7'Planted questions - merely designed to allow the PM to reiterate a few soundbits about the government achievements.  Precious time is wasted with MPs asking pointless questions about things the government has no control over. They could be asking about government policy
How many days are allocated for Backbench Business Committee debates per Parliamentary session?	35 days Backbenchers add any debates they wish to a list. The committee chooses which motion to debate
How many crossbenchers are there in the Lords?	About 185. About 1/4Effectively a hung chamber. No party has overally control
What are the 5 grounds for denying Parliamentary Requests for information?	National SecurityCommercial sensitvity (affects stocks and shares)Does not represent value for money to the taxpayer. Information is not held centrally Someone else's responsibility
How large was the Conservative rebellion over the Windsor Framework (2023)	29 MPs voted against. 22 Conservative MPs rebelled against it, including Johnson, Truss and Patel.
How many Conservatives rebelled over the 2013 Same Sex Marriage Act?	136 Rebelled and 40 Abstained
How many Conservatives rebelled over proposed House of Lords reform in 2012?	91
Essay plan/ Debate - Is Parliament effective in fulfilling the scrutiny function?	EffectiveIneffective                 In 2005, Backbench MPs defeated Blair's plans to extend the detention of terrorist suspects to 90 days. This was his first ever defeat in the commons.  In 2015, Cameron lost a vote to reform Sunday trading laws in England. Under the coalition, Parliament was the most rebellious in post war history - MPs rebelled in 35% of votes. E.g. 21/57 lib dem MPs rebelled against raising tuition fees. Theresa May was defeated 28 times in just over 2 years. May suffered the heaviest defeat of any British Prime Minister Mps rejected her bill with a majority of 230 (202-432). 118 Tory Rebels. Legislative process has been improved with the Wright reforms - more scrutiny. House of Lords takes an active roleGovernments with majority can push through what they please. MPs are merely 'lobby fodder'. Blair did not lose a vote in the Commons. The Coalition was only defeated 7 times in 5 years. Brown was only defeated 3 times. Any deviation from the government will lead to swift punishment. In 2019, Johnson removed the whip from 21 Tory MPs who refused to support his hard Brexit. House of Lords cannot stop legislation as they are the unelected house and restrained by Parliaments Acts - E.g. Police Crime Courts and Sentencing ACt was pushed through despite the displeasure of the Lords
What did William Gladstone say to MPs	'Your business is not to govern the country, but it is, if you think fit, to call to account those who do’
How has the Commons Select Committee of Privileges held Boris Johnson to account?	Privileges Committee, unlike many other select committees has the power to compel attendence. Was questioned by the Committee, Chair is Hariet Harman. If found to be in contempt of Parliament, committee can recomend a suspension for over 10 days. Parliament then has decide whether to ratify. If ratified and 10% of constituents sign a petition, a Recall ballot will be triggered (Recall Act 2015)Watch this space
What % of the Lords comes from an ethnic minority background?	Only 6% of the lords
How many MPs are men?	450/650 MPs are men
What % of MPs are oxbridge educated and what % are privately educated	21% Oxbridge. 27% Private School2/3s are graduates
Debate - Is Parliament representative?	YesNo                 According to ERS 421/650 MPs had a majority of votes from constitutents in 2019. MPs Able to act as representatives and speak for constituents.Overwhelmingly Oxbridge educated (21%) and private school educated (27%). Most MPs are male (430/650) 229 elected on minority vote. Has become more diverse. 45 LGBTQ members elected. House of Lords is not elected and therefore unrepresentative
Essay plan - Is Parliament effective in scrutinising the executive?	For Against                 PMQs and urgent questions are effective ways of scrutinising the executivePMQs encourages the world of MPs behaviour in the Commons. PM can lie and not answer the question asked. Johnson - Jimmy Saville Accusation, 'fastest growth in the G7'Becomes soundbites rather than actual scrutinyPublic Bill Committees scrutinise and debate amendments. Considers each bill clause by clause. Public bill committees can recieve written evidence from outside organisations. Democratic Audit (2015) - 3/5s of all MPs on bill committees have relevant experience. Their membership is still dominated by the party whips. Scrutiny of legislation is ineffective and normally of little value as whips dominate proceedings. Only a tiny minority of amendments at the committee stage are from the oppositionSelect committees scrutinise government departments - E,g, Foreign Affairs Committee criticised governments response to withdrawl from Afghanistan. Jeremy Hunt scrutinised Johnson as chair of the Health CommitteeWright reforms meant that select committee chairs are elected by MPs, not appointed by executive.MPs have important expertise - Tom Tugendhat, former chair of the Foreign Affairs Select committee had experience in a military backgroundThey have an interrogative style of questioning E.g. Hariet Harmen and Johnson. Yvette Cooper's questioning of home sec Amber Rudd in 2018 led to 'serious concern' over the accuracy of her previous statements, ultimately resulted in her resignation. In 2016, Health Committee recommended a tax on sugary drinks and Osbourne introduced one. Select committees have no enforcement powers - the government is not obliged to act on their recomendations. Very little support and resources, compared to ministers. They review problems after they have occuredSince the Wright reforms, backbench MPs have more control over Parliamentary business in order to debate issues of their choosing. 35 days are allocated for BbBc debate per Parliamentary session. Backbenchers add to a list what they want to discuss. Debates petitions that recieve over 100,000 votes.Merely advisory, no impact on government policy.1.8million signed an epetition stating that Trump should not be given a state visit. Debated yet the visit still went ahead.  The opposition is given a privileged position in Parliament which enables them to effectively scrutinse the government. E.g. Starmer, CorbynCreate an alternative government If the government has a majority, it is very difficiult for opposition to hold it to account
Essay plan - Is the House of Lords as effective as the commons in fulfilling it's function?	YesNo                 Party discipline in the Lord is weaker than in the Commons, so it is more independent and much more able to challenge the government on their legislative agenda. Non partisan manorPeers are there for life - whipping system is weak. Lords voted to delay tax credits cut in 2015Welfare reform (2012) The Lords inflicted three defeats on proposed benefits cuts and plans to means test paymernts for disabled people. Lord Patel, a crossbencher called and former president of royal college of Obstecrcians, an 'immoral attack on the sick, vulnerable and poor'.  Power is limited by Parliament Acts and Salisbury. Means they can only delay laws, not hold government to accountE.g. Public Order Bill, Police Courts crime and Sentencing ActAs there is no government majority in the Lords, the Lords are often more able to scrutinise the government. 1/4 of Lords are Crossbenchers. 185. Means no party has majority.  The Lords have no direct ability to challenge the Prime Minister, unlike the commonsThe Lords are able to represent the people via the expertise on offer, as well as representing more vulnerable members of society E.g. Doreen LawrenceBecause they are unelected, the Lords cannot hope to fulfil a representative function as effectively as the commons
What is secondary legislation?	Secondary, or delegated, legislation is law made by a person or body other than parliament (usually government ministers), under powers delegated by a ‘parent’ Act of parliament. This parent act is referred to as ‘primary’ legislation, and specifies what the secondary legislation can do, who can make it and (usually) the procedure through which it should be made.
How do whips work?	They have the power to allocate offices, offer the possibility of government or shadow government in exchange for loyaltyThe political commentator Philip Cowley famously claimed that Conservative whips kept a ‘black book’ containing party members’ misdemeanours for leverage,while during the height of the ‘partygate’ scandal in January 2022, the Conservative chair of the Public Administration and Constitutional Affairs Select Committee William Wragg accused government whips of blackmailing their MPs. He reported that MPs had been told their constituencies could lose investment if they continued in their attempt to oust Boris Johnson.
What is the Retained EU Law Bill?	3000-4000 of retained EU law must be rewritten by ministers, by 31st of December. Will be incredibly expensive and create economic problems
What was the Michelle Mone scandal?	The Conservative peer Michelle Mone and her children secretly received £29m originating from the profits of a PPE business that was awarded large government contracts after she recommended it to ministers, documents seen by the Guardian indicate.Lady Mone’s support helped the company, PPE Medpro, secure a place in a “VIP lane” the government used during the coronavirus pandemic to prioritise companies that had political connections. It then secured contracts worth more than £200m.
Meg Russell on lords Reform (to be watched and make notes)	https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=pyL5S6E3CTo She suggests that the second chamber should have more powers to enforce the devolution settlements. The judicial appointments commission should be given more power. E.g. a cap on the number of lords. PM has to give a statement which outlines why they are nominating someone. Potentially they could have a veto
How much did the times find the price for a peerage was?	An investigation by The Sunday Times and Open Democracy reveals that wealthy benefactors appear to be guaranteed a peerage if they take on the temporary role as the party treasurer and increase their own donations beyond £3 million.
Why was the nomiation of Peter Cruddas controversial?	He was nominated in 2020, despite advice from House of Lords Appointment commision, which unanimously recommended that the PM rescind his nomination. It was later reported that he donated 500k days after being elevated to the lordsHe has donated over £3million in total
Why did the House of Lords reject the governments legislation seeking to cut tax credits?	In 2015, the House of Lords refused to give their agreement to a statutory instrument that  would have cut tax credit payments to hundreds of thousands of people – contained in the Tax Credits (Income Thresholds and Determination of Rates) (Amendment) Regulations 2015According to Meg Russell, the Lords has a formal veto on delegated legislation, but not acts of ParliaemntThe Cameron government dropped their proposal
What was the Cooper-Letwin Bill?	Yvette Cooper and Oliver Letwin proposed a private members bill in the House of Commons in March 2019, which became the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2019 when it was passed. It was designed to ensure that ministers could not allow the UK to leave the EU with no deal without parliamentary approval: it facilitated an extension of the Article 50 period. Its provisions created an obligation for the government to table a motion to agree the length of extension the Prime Minister would seek from the EU. The government agreed an extension and the Act then lapsed.
What is the Benn Act?	The Benn Act – or the European Union (Withdrawal) (No. 2) Act 2019 – is an Act of Parliament that provided a statutory obligation for the government to prevent a no deal Brexit on 31 October 2019 by requiring in the Prime Minister to ask for an extension of Article 50. The only way this could be avoided was the House of Commons approving a motion on a withdrawal agreement agreed with the EU by 19 October 2019. The Act set out the steps that the Prime Minister would need to take to seek this extension. When the Article 50 process was extended, the Act also created obligations for the government to lay reports on the status of negotiations with the EU, which could be voted on by the House of Commons. The Act was introduced as a Private Member’s Bill by the Labour MP Hilary Benn. It passed Third Reading in the House of Commons with a majority of 28 (327 votes to 299) and gained Royal Assent on 9 September 2019.
How old is the average age of the Lords	On average 70 years old. Only approx 6% of Lords from an ethnic minority background In short, our key findings are as follows: 3 in every 4 Lords are men.The average Lord is 71 years old.The most common first names of Lords are John and David, with the most common surname being SmithNearly a third of Lords are members of the Conservative party.70% of Lords received private education and 95% have a university degree.
According to the Electoral Reform Society, 62 peers claimed [...] in expenses despite not voting in a single division between 2010-2015	According to the Electoral Reform Society, 62 peers claimed £360,000 in expenses despite not voting in a single division between 2010-2015
How many independent MPs currently sit in Parliament?	As of April 2023, there are 14 independent MPs.  This is the same as the number of lib dem MPs 12 of them have been accused of personal wrongdoing
Why have ministers retreated on the Retained EU Law Bill? (April, 2023)	The Guardian revealed that ministers retreated after Tory peers warned they would join a mass cross party revolt in the house of lords
Can the lords overrule the commons? How could it true to do so?	Normally the Lords sees its role as sending amendments back to the Commons in order to ask ‘are you sure?’ and allow MPs an opportunity for further debate. The Lords usually tries to avoid frustrating the will of the elected House. Consequently, it is rare for the Lords to engage in multiple rounds of ping pong.  In theory, if the Lords disagreed fundamentally with a bill, it could deliberately cause it to be lost by insisting on an amendment until a stalemate was reached or ‘double insistence’ took place. In this unlikely circumstance, the Government could use the Parliament Act (passed in 1911, updated in 1949) to pass the bill in the following session. Resorting to the Parliament Act would delay the passage of the legislation, therefore the Government normally works with the Lords to find compromises where there are disagreementsThis happened with the Hunting With Hounds Act and the EU Elections Act
What is double insistence?	Normally both Houses will make every effort to reach compromise over a bill so that it can become law.  However, if one House insists on an amendment and the second House insists on its disagreement with that amendment, or if they have clearly reached a stalemate, the bill is lost. This is what happened to the European Parliamentary Elections Bill 1997–98.
Who is rumoured to be on Boris Johnson's resignation honours list?	Paul Dacre (editor-in-chief of DMG Media and a former editor of the Daily Mail). Allegra Stratton - Disgraced former downing street press sec who joked about parties happening in downing street Nadeen Dorries - former culture secretary and staunch Johnsonian Stanley Johnson - his father.
The Department for Health & Social Care (DHSC) lost [...]% of the £12 billion it spent on personal protective equipment (PPE) in the first year of the pandemic to inflated prices and kit that did not meet requirements – including fully £4 billion of PPE that will not be used in the NHS and needs to be disposed of.  Which committee wrote this report and who is the chair?	The Department for Health & Social Care (DHSC) lost 75% of the £12 billion it spent on personal protective equipment (PPE) in the first year of the pandemic to inflated prices and kit that did not meet requirements – including fully £4 billion of PPE that will not be used in the NHS and needs to be disposed of.  Which committee wrote this report and who is the chair?  The Public Accounts Committee = It is responsible for overseeing government expenditures, and to ensure they are effective and honestLord Henessy called it the 'Queen of the select committees' The chair is Meg Hillier
What criticism did the foreign affairs select committee give about the withdrawl from Afghanistan? (May 2022)	A scathing reportForeign Affairs Select held Raab to account for being on holiday during evacuation in Afghanistan. The report says 'the withdrawl from Afghanistan was a disaster and a betrayal of our allies that will damage the UK's interests for years to come'
How does the executive dominate Parliament?	Standing order 14 - they control the agenda. Whipping system Statutory Instruments - do not need acts of parliamentBut could be countered by when the House of Lords stopped government capping benefits in 2015. But the Lords said that it was a Statutory InstrumentPower of patronage - payroll vote gives enormous amount of powers. MPs must by loyal for promotions.
House of Lords and Tax Credits Vote – In October 2015 the House of Lords voted by 289 to 272 against government plans to implement changes to the Tax Credits System. This was extremely controversial as, by convention, the House of Lords should not vote against money bills. However, Members of the House of Lords argued that this was a, not a bill, and therefore was not bound by this convention.	
How many defeats did Theresa May suffer over 2 years?	33 defeats in 2 years
How many times was Theresa May's EU withdrawl bill rejected in the Lords?	The lords defeated the government 15 times in a very short period in 2018 over the EU Withdrawal Bill
How does Parliament scrutinise the executive?	Questioning - Ministers questions Prime Minister's Questions. PMQUrgent questions - relevant minister must come to the chamber to explain government policy, if speaker grants an urgent question. 307 UQ granted betwen 2017-2019Writing letters Humble address - Committees Public bill committee's - look at bills in detail and consider amendments.  Departmental select committees - Liason committee - Scrutinises PM twice a year. Debating Bills are debated in the commons, BbBC debates motions of their choosing.  Emergency debates sometimes grantedOpposition -  Can hold weak government to account. But also can be ignored if majority is largeLords         Baroness Lister suggested amendments to the illegal migration bill that would give special protections to pregnant women and allow their detention only up to 72 hours   Defeated govenrment on minimum service level bill
What does the Acronym for the ROLLS of Parliament roles stand for?	
What kind of bill was the Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Act (1965) ?	It was a Private Members Bill introduced by Labour Backbench MP Sidney Silverman
Why are Private Members Bills so likely to fail	Standing Order 14 - 'government business has precedence at every sitting'. Controls most of the time. Lack of government support - Aim of government is to fulfil manifesto promises. Not keen on supporting opposition bills.  Objections from other Backbenchers-  Filibustering - Talking for so long to take up time needed for the vote
How do divisions work?	When a vote (division) needs to be taken in the House of Commons or the House of Lords the Speaker the Speaker will first test the opinion of the House by calling a voice vote. In this procedure, MPs will shout ‘Aye’ or ‘Nay’ depending on their opinion. If the will of the House is clear after this voice vote, the matter will be decided. However, if the result of the voice vote in unclear, the Speaker will call for a division. MPs have 8 minutes to register their vote. They do this my entering one of two lobbies, As they enter the lobby, their vote is recorded by tellers.
What are the advantages of the voting system in Parliament?	It encourages MPs to take part in debates. If they know they are going to be expected to vote near the Commons Chamber, there is a greater chance they will attend the debate.     It is transparent. Not only can people see which lobby MPs go into, the vote is also recorded in Hansard, the parliamentary record.     It allows MPs to enter a dialogue with each other. They can conduct parliamentary business while waiting to be counted in the division lobby. This is particularly a benefit for Backbench MPs who otherwise have little chance to mingle with Cabinet Members and other Frontbench MPs.
What are the disadvantages of the voting system in Parliament?	It is extremely time consuming. Each vote takes approximately 15 minutes. In some debates, where multiple amendments have been made to a bill, there could be upwards of ten votes on a single bill.     It is inconvenient. It forces MPs to drop whatever they are doing to race to the Commons chamber. This is a particular problem for Government Ministers who are unlikely to be in the vicinity of the chamber on most days.     It increases the power of the whips. The whips can wait outside the lobbies and urge (or even demand) that their MPs go into the right one. In many instances, MPs do not even know what they are voting for, they simply walk into the lobby that their whips tell them to.
Who selects the membership of Public Bill Committees?	Party whips.
What are the strengths of Public Bill Committees?	• Detailed scrutiny They allow MPs to go through a bill line-by-line and give it the detailed scrutiny it likely cannot get in the chamber. • Specialist advice -  It allows the selection of MPs with specialist expertise to sit and scrutinise bills. For example, Jess Phillips sat on the Domestic Abuse Bill committee and she has extensive experience of campaigning on this issue.  • It allows MPs to hear the opinions of external stakeholders.They can calll for experts. • It allows MPs to raise concerns that they might have received from their constituents.
What are the weaknesses of Public Bill Committees?	• They are normally highly partisan and MPs vote within them the way that their whips want.• MPs who sit on a Public Bill Committee are effectively chosen to do so by their party whips. This means that the MPs chosen may be those least likely to challenge their own party.• Amendments to the bill are often not accepted unless they are proposed by the Government side.• Very few amendments come out of Public Bill Committees. This is because the Government have a majority and Government MPs are heavily whipped.• They do not have the same level of independence as Select Committees do since the Wright Reforms.
How do the government try and control the legislative process?	▪ Whip system They can use their whips to make sure the Public Bills Committee quickly process the bill.  ▪ Standing order 14They can limit the time available for a debate in the House of Commons. • Payroll vote - ministers are bound by CMR ▪ They can make concessions to win over backbenchers or members of the Lords.▪ They can threaten the use of the Parliament Acts to pass the legislation.
Examples of prominent Crossbench Peers with particular expertise  Baroness Boothroyd – Former Speaker of the House of Commons: An expert on constitutional and parliamentary   affairs. Lord Hennessey – Prominent political author: An expert on constitutional issues.  Lord Dannat – Former Chief of the General Staff: An expert on military matters.  Baroness Grey-Thompson – Former Olympic Paralympian: An expert on sporting and disability matters.  Lord Lisvane – A former Clerk of the House of Commons: An expert on constitutional and parliamentary issues.  Lord O’Donnell – A former Cabinet Secretary: An expert on government relations and administration.	
What are the 3 legislative advantages that the House of Lords offers (TIE)	▪ Time – Traditionally the House of Lords can spend far more time considering legislation. They are able to do this line-by-line. For example, the Committee Stage in the House of Lords is conducted by the whole house.   ▪ Expertise – There are several well-respected professionals in the House of Lords. They are able to use this expertise to make a bill better.   ▪ Independence – Although there are only 185 crossbenchers in the Lords, as a whole the House is more independent. Firstly, this is because the whips are less powerful and secondly because they do not have to rely on public or support to be re-elected in the future like an MP does.
Why do MPs follow the whip?	- Promotion prospects The whips have enormous power. If an MP wants to advance their career in Parliament, they will not want to upset the whips.  - Maintain party unity MPs understand that party unity is very important. MPs know that rebelling can reduce the appearance of a unified party and, in turn, harm their own electoral prospects.  - Broad agreement - MPs are likely to share the broad ideological position with their party and therefore willing to compromise on some of their own belief to stay loyal.
How many Tory MPs rebelled against Johnson's vaccine passports?	2021 – Boris Johnson’s plan to introduce vaccine passports for COVID-19 in the UK was opposed by 99 Conservatives. As it was supported by the Opposition it passed, but this was a significant rebellion for the Prime Minister.
How many days are allocated for the opposition to set the Parliamentary agenda?	Only20 in total 17 for labour party 3 for other parties.
What are the limits on backbench MPs?	Heavy Whipping – MPs know that it is very hard to be elected to Parliament without the support of a political party. Therefore, they need to keep their political party onside and not risk the wrath of the whip by rebelling against them. Lack of Time for Backbench Business – There is limited time placed solely for the use of backbench MPs. Currently this amounts to 35 days, normally on a Friday where most MPs have left to go to their constituencies.  Power of Patronage – Party Leaders have incredible powers of patronage. If a backbencher wants to advance their career in the future, they need to have the party leader onside.  Poor Facilities – Backbench MPs are also hampered by bad facilities. Although a new building was built for MPs in 2001 called Portcullis House, many are still based in the Palace of Westminster, the complete refurbishment of which is estimated to cost over £2 Billion Pounds.  Membership of Committees – Although membership of Committees allows MPs to scrutinise the Government, thereby increasing the effectiveness, it is also a large burden on their time. This means much parliamentary business is missed by MPs.
Following Boris Johnson’s apology for attending a potentially unlawful gathering in Downing Street during COVID-19, Keir Starmer utterly dominated Boris Johnson during PMQs.  Keir Starmer called him a man without [...]	Following Boris Johnson’s apology for attending a potentially unlawful gathering in Downing Street during COVID-19, Keir Starmer utterly dominated Boris Johnson during PMQs.  Keir Starmer called him a man without shame
What are the benefits of PMQs?pmr	Makes PM directly accountable to Parliament       It makes the Government accountable to the Prime Minister - PM has to monitor government so they are well informed for PMQs. High profle in the media and any mistakes are highlighted.    Very stressful. Tony Blair said it made him feel sick         It forces the development of policy - Prevents PM from becoming complacent as they have to present a vision for Britain.    It allows both the PM and Leader of the Opposition to advertise themselves to the electorate - Leader of opposition needs to make strong performances to drive perceptions.
How many Urgent Questions did Bercow grant in the Parliamentary session 2017-2019?	Under Speaker Bercow, MPs asked 307 Urgent Questions during the 2017– 19 session, almost 0.88 per sitting day
How do urgent questions limit the power of government?	▪ Urgent Questions are a mechanism to try to ensure that Ministers make important public statements to the House of Commons first and not directly to the media. For example, in May 2020 the Chancellor Rishi Sunak planned to make his announcement extending the COVID-19 furlough scheme to the media. However, after the granting of an Urgent Question to Annelise Dodds (Shadow Chancellor) he was instead forced to do it in the House of Commons.  ▪ Urgent Questions ensure that a government minister can always be held directly accountable if an urgent issue arises. This increases Parliament’s ability to carry out its fundamental role of executive scrutiny.  ▪Urgent Questions make sure that Parliament has some control over the political agenda. Without Urgent Questions, ministers may be able to avoid direct scrutiny over an issue until the next Departmental Question Time or Prime Minister’s Questions session. The provision or Urgent Questions ensure that the government cannot escape parliamentary scrutiny over controversial issues.  ▪ Urgent Questions give power to individual backbenchers. Anyone backbench MP can table an Urgent Question request and, if it meets the criteria, it can be granted.
What are the limits to urgent questions?	▪ They are entirely at the discretion of the Speaker. The Speaker is unlikely to grant an Urgent Question if there is another reasonable way that the issue could be raised.  ▪ The Speaker cannot force a particular Minister to respond, only that a Government Minister responds. Often, a more junior minister will be sent if there is an issue that might be damaging to the Government. For example, in the Urgent Questions relating to ‘partygate’ it was Michael Ellis who answered on behalf of the Government, not the Prime Minister.  ▪ Like PMQs, Ministers can often get away with a political response that does not fully answer the question that is asked.
What are 'emergency debates'?	Emergency debates (sometimes referred to as ‘Standing Order No.24 debates) provide a means for MPs to propose a debate at short notice on a “specific and important matter that should have urgent consideration.”They are not binding on the government
How can an emergency debate be triggered?	MPs apply to the speaker for an emergency debate. If the speaker believes the application has merit, they will allow the MP proposing the debate three minutes to pitch the debate. The speaker decides whether to put the application to the house. If the speaker does so, then MPs vote on whether a debate will take place.
	
How are urgent questions granted?	Any opposition or backbench MP can request that the speaker grant an Urgent Question. If granted the speaker can require a responsible minister to attend the commons to answer questions from MPs. Decision to grant is at the discretion of the speaker
What are the advantages of select committees in scrutinising the executive?	▪ Time - They allow for far more detailed questioning on Ministers than is possible in the Chamber of the House of Commons. For example, Amber Rudd was forced to resign in 2018 after a consolidated line of questioning by Yvette Cooper in the Home Affairs Select Committee revealed that Rudd had been unaware of removal ▪ Independence - Since Wright reforms, they are chosen by the house, not by party whips. They operate in bi partisan manner, which gives them more legitimacy.  ▪ Expertise They allow MPs to move from being generalists to being specialists through their work on a Committee. For example, after years as Chair on the Home Affairs Select Committee Yvette Cooper is now Shadow Home Secretary.  targets within her own department for migrants.
What are the limits to select committee scrutiny?	They cannot force the Government to adopt a motion and many of their reports are largely ignored -  in 2021 the Work and Pensions Select Committee wrote a detailed report on universal credit highlighting a number of flaws and problems with its role out. The government made very little change to the Universal Credit based on this report.▪ They have no power to force (subpoena) witnesses to attend. Witnesses also do not give evidence under Oath (as they would do in the US Congress). E.g. Mark Zuckerberg refused to attend before the Culture, Media and Sport Committee. In 2022 Raab declined to appear before a select committee to explain the impact of the British Bill of Rights. Priti Patel refused to explain the Rwanda poliy to the home affairs select committee▪ Whilst they are more bipartisan than the Chamber, Committees are still made up in proportion to the size of the parties in the House.  Committees are often not well resourced
What are the limits to the power of the lords?	States and conventions that strain their power - Salisbury Convention, Parliament Acts, Financial privA lack of democratic legitimacy makes them less assertiveA lack of engagement from Lords. Many simply do not attend. E.g. Lord sugar
Why might it have been argued that the Fixed Term Parliament Act (2011) was ineffective anyways?	In 2019 Boris Johnson used his parliamentary majority to pass the Early Parliamentary General Election Act and bypass the Fixed-Term Parliament Act     Then in 2022, the FTPA was repealed and replaced by the The Dissolution and Calling of Parliament Act 2022
Dame Meg Hillier MP, Chair of the Public Accounts Committee, said:  “The story of PPE purchasing is perhaps the most shameful episode the UK government response to the pandemic.  This has left us with massive public contracts now under investigation by the National Crime Agency or in dispute because of allegations of modern slavery in the supply chain.	
What did the Foreign Affairs Select Committee conclude about the intervention in Libya in their 2016 Report?	David Cameron’s intervention in Libya was carried out with no proper intelligence analysis, drifted into an unannounced goal of regime change and shirked its moral responsibility to help reconstruct the country following the fall of Muammar Gaddafi, according to a scathing report by the foreign affairs select committee.The failures led to the country becoming a failed a state on the verge of all-out civil war, the report adds.Failed to forsee the islamist threat
How does Ministers Questions work?	On each sitting day apart from Fridays a Government Department answers questions in the House of Commons. MPs can table questions in advance and ask a follow-up question. In addition, MPs can ask an unlimited number of written questions to Ministers. These questions and the response are published by Hansard and are now available on the internet.
What are the Strengths of Ministers Questions or Daily Questions?	▪ The existence of Question Time each day ensures that the government is kept up to date with the workings of their department.  ▪ In normal question time MPs can ask a question in advance and then a supplementary question. This allows them to establish a line of questioning.   ▪ MPs can also table a question for a written response which may extract more detail from the department in question.   However, despite these strengths, Ministers can still often avoid answering the question if posed orally.
Why did the Eu Withdrawl Act pass with very few amendments in the House of Lords?	They let the EU Withdrawl Act (2020) pass without any amendment because it was just after a general election and the public had given MPs an mandate to act. According to Meg Russel, Lords pays close attention to the attitudes of the commons and backbenchers. If there is unhappiness, they will be proactive and make amendments. But if they sense that the Commons wants actions, they will let it through.
How has the Backbench Business Committee influenced government policy?	In 2011 it facilitated a debate on the 1989 Hillsborough football ground disaster, when a motion directing that the independent inquiry into those events should receive all government documents relating to the catastrophe was agreed.   In 2011 it scheduled a debate on a referendum on EU membership. Although the motion was defeated, the scale of Conservative backbench support for it shifted David Cameron's attitude and put pressure on him to agree to a referendum
Why might the Backbench Business Committee not be very influential on government policy?	Backbench motions are not binding on the government, but are merely advisory. Backbench motions can be debated and voted on for nothing to happen. For example, when on 25 October 2012 MPs voted overwhelmingly (147 votes to 28) to suspend the badger cull, many people could not understand why this decision of the House of Commons was not then implemented. Success will only be achieved if the government agrees - like private members bills
Which specific committees must come from the official opposition?	The chairs of specific committees must come from the official opposition, such as the Commitee on Standards and the all powerful Public Accounts Committee (Queen of the select Committee, Peter Henessy)
"According to Philip Norton,            “The opposition may not have the means to defeat the government but it has the weapon of publicity...the government may therefore modify its behaviour to avoid giving the opposition a political victory."" (Norton)"	
How does the opposition scrutinise the government?	"1) Presents an alternative vision for government - Shadow cabinet. 2) Bring forward questions. Scrutinise performance - PMQs, Urgent Questions. 3) Examine government performance - Opposition researches will be meticulous in catching out any mistakes that they can exploit. Weaknesses will be exposed. ""A man without shame"". 4) Use of media . Can be used to highlight government failure. 5) Making amendments."
What are the limits/weaknesses to the opposition in scrutinising the government?	Lack of institutional support - the government has civil service, SPADs whilst the opposition relies on limmited state funding known as 'short money'. Limited opportunities to set the agenda - HM opposition only has 17 days. Might lack credibility - The opposition might have just lost the election and be blamed for the problems. E.g. Ed Milliband and Ed Balls were blamed for the 2008 Crash. Leader - Might lack skill. Jeremy Corbyn was not able to hold Johnson to account because he was so electorally toxic. Lack of party unity.  Majority of incumbent - A government with a large majority can just ignore the opposition. For example, Blair just ignored William Hague.
Examples of emergency dabtes	
Examples of emergency debates	
How does the Lords scrutinise the executive?	
Using the source, evaluate the view that Parliament is largely effective at challenging the work of the government (Mock paper 2022)	Thesis statement - Parliament is ineffective at challenging the work of government.                   EffectiveIneffective                 Question time -  - MPs apply to the speaker for UQ. Compels a minister to come and answer the question.  PMQs - PM has to answer questions every Wednesday. Allows opposition to scrutinise. They must be on top of things. Otherwise they can be disgraced. - 'A man without shame'. 'Weak Weak Weak'. 'Her tax cut, gone. Gone. Gone. Why isn't she?  UQ can only be granted at the discretion of the speaker, which limits their effectiveness.   Often government send junior ministers to answer the question, rather than facing the music. Michael Ellis was sent instead of the PM to defend party gate.  PMQs might not be effective because they are just a chance for the PM to lie and obfuscate. Public Bill Committees  - Public Bill Committees allow members from both sides of the house to examine a bill line by line. 3/5s of members have expertise in the area. Allows greater scrutiny.  Select Committees - Wright reforms mean that Select Committees are now far more independent. Chairs and membership is selected by the house, not the party whip. They have more time and expertise. For example, the Foreign Affairs Select Committee criticised the governments withdrawl from Afghanistan. They labelled it as a 'betrayal of our allies'. Yvette Cooper (current shadow home sec) used her expertise to interrogate Amber Rudd over the use of deportation targets. Led to her resignation. - Public Bill Committees are not independent. 99% of ministerial amendments are accepted, but less than 1% of opposition amendments are accepted. MPs are heavily whipped and are unlikely to challenge the legislation as government is trying to rush it through.  Select committees Often cannot force governemnt to act. In 2022, Patel declined to go in front of the home affairs select committee to explain the Rwanda policy.  Recommendations are often ignored - In 202 - Standing order 14. The government controls the timetable. Has the whip system.   Lords -  Has become increasingly assertive since the Parliament Act. Lack of whipping means that it is able to be more independent. For example, the lords threatened a mass rebellion over the EU retained law bill, which meant that the governemnt u turned on it.   - Still lacks democratic legitimacy. If government has a strong majority and commons really wants to have something passed then they will yield. They are bound by the Salibury convention, Parliaments Acts 1911 and 1949.  The commons has financial privilage.
Evaluate the view that PMQs should be abolished and replaced by other forms of Parliamentary scrutiny of the executive.	"RetainedAbolished and replaced                 ""Provides scrutiny that is an essential part of democracy."". - PMQs allows the opposition to hold the government to account. Very public and high profile, so forces the government to remain on top of policy developments.  - Partygate, Liz Truss, 'Rarely englightening'. 'High drama'. Does not produce anything of substance, but rather PMs will just say anyting to avoid embarassment. Mainly planted questions to reiterate a few soundbites. 'Even the best performers have dreaded them'.  the most nerve-racking, discombobulating, nail-biting, bowel-moving, terror inspiring, courage-draining experience according to Tony Blair.  - However, they are full of 'heckling'. They encourage punch and judy politics. Mainly Jeers and insults. For example, Tony Blair called John major ""Weak Weak"".  E.g. Boris Johnson accused Keir Starmer of failing to prosecute Jimmy Saville, and kept misrepresenting the facts 'fastest growth in the g7'  'Makes us different from other democracies. Allows the opposition to advertise themselves to the electorate.  Tony Blair said to John Major 'I lead my party, he follows his'   Keir Starmer has used PMQs to advertise him and Racheal Reeves as governent in waiting. 'abolition of 45p tax cut. GONE. Corporation tax cut GONE. Her best friend the former chancellor GONE. Why isn't she? - Could be better scrutinised trhough select committees, the liason committees, debates and petitions."
Evaluate the view that the UK government’s control over Parliament has reduced in recent years.	Control has not reduced - Standing order 14  - Public bill Committees.  - Whiping system.  Increasing powers. E.g. White house style briefing room, special advisors, Fusion of cabinet office with the prime ministers office, order in council which allowed campbell and powell to issue orders to civil servants,  Control has reduced - Coalition government meant less ability for government to dominate and force through legislation (91 MPs rebelled on lords reform.  - Tony Wright reforms. Creation of the BbBc.  - Select committees more assertive and challenging.  MPs do not just toe the party line but will rebel. Lack of discipline in recent years. 99 MPs rebeled against lockdown measures data1data2data1data2data1data2
Evaluate the view that although the House of Lords has less power than the House of Commons, in practice it exerts more influence on government decisions.	Disagree Agree                 data1data2data1data2data1data2
Evaluate the view that the principal role of backbench MPs is now to hold the government to account	William Gladstone 'Your business is not to govern the country, but it is, if you think fit, to call to account those who do’                  Not their role - Backbenchers should loyally do what the front tell them to do. - Doctrine of the Mandate. - Strong government  They should be representing constituents. Their role has now changed - Tony Wright reforms  - John Bercow was a revolutionary speaker. Granted more urgent questions. Made Parliament more assertive.                 - Brexit was a one off  - May's premiership was because she had to deal with Brexit and she was 8 seats short of a majority in 2017. Poor party loyalty and weak Prime Minister. Under Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak, this has returned to normal. data2- Constituency work is their primary job data2data1data2
The government is much more likely to suffer a defeat in the lords than in the Commons. For example, the coalition 2010 to 2015 suffered [...] defeats in the Lords, compared to [...] defeats in the commons	The government is much more likely to suffer a defeat in the lords than in the Commons. For example, the coalition 2010 to 2015 suffered 100 defeats in the Lords, compared to 6 defeats in the commons
