#separator:tab
#html:false
What was the verdict of the 2017 Miller Case?	Parliament must legislate to authorise the triggering of article 50.
When did the supreme court open?	In 2009 But the constituional reform act was in 2005
How many justices are there on the supreme court?	12
Why was the supreme court established?	Improve judicial neutralityIt was becoming clear that the judiciary was being asked to adjudicate upon constituional issues which it was not appropriate for members of the House of Lords to decide. In case of R (Jackson) v Attorney General [2005], the Law Lords had to resolve a dispute between the Commons and Lords in relation to whether Parliaments Acts could be used by commons to pass the Hunting Act 2004. The judges hearing the case were members of the lordsClearer seperation of powers
Why was the office of Lord Chancellor split up?	The office of Lord Chancellor fused the roles of head of judiciary, presiding officer of the House of Lords and a Cabinet Minister. Lord Chancellor was appointed by the PM and was a member of cabinetThis did not create judicial independence. As a result, the roles of the Lord Chancellor's office were split to maintain the principle of judicial independence. Lord speaker Lord chief justice and chancellor of the high court Therefore improves seperation of powers and roles
How did the Judicial Appointments Commision address concerns about the independence of the judiciary? (CRA, 2005)	The JAC appoints judges to courts and tribunals but does not select justices for supreme courtPreviously, law lords were appointed by the Crown, on the advice of the PM. Other judges were appointed by the Crown, on advice of the Lord Chancellor, who was appointed by the PM and was a member of cabinet. The JAC was created to select candidates, free from political interference, whilst encouraging diversity in the range of people available for selection. Candidates are chosen by merit.
How are justices for the supreme court appointed?	An indepenent select commission appoints for any vacant seat that arises. This is not the same as the JAC. The JAC is not responsible for selecting justices of the supreme court.
What are the 4 roles of the supreme court?	Hears appeals on arguable points of law of general public importanceConcentrates on cases of the greatest public and constitutional importanceActs as the final court of appeal for all UK civil cases, and all criminal cases from England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Has assumed the role of adjudicating on whether the devolved legislatures or governemnts had acted within or exceeded their devolved powers
How are supreme court justices appointed?	When a vacancy appears, a selection commission is created. Potential candidates apply for the job and are interviewed by the selection commission Candidates must have held judidical high office for at least two years or satisfy the 15 year eligibility condition in terms of their work as a barrister or soliciter. The commission is chaired by the incumbent president of the supreme court, who also nominates a senior judge who is not on the supreme court to sit. In addition, it includes a representative from the seperate Judicial Appointments Commission.
What can Supreme Court judges do if a public body is found acting 'ultra vires'	Through judicial review - they can declare their behaviour unlawfulThey can strike down decisions made by public bodies (including government ministers ) when does decisions were considered to be ultra vires.Ultra vires means 'beyond the power' - when public authorities act unlawfully because their actions have no statutory authority
Why did the supreme court rule that an Act of Parliament was required to trigger article 50?	Well established principle that prerogative powers could not be applied to acts which might lead to a change in domestic law. The European Communities Act (1972) authorised the process of EU law becoming UK law and taking primacy over UK domestic law. Leaving the EU will clearly change UK law, so withdrawl requires an Act of Parliament.
Which Newspaper branded the supreme court 'enemies of the people' after their controversial ruling that an Act of Parliament was required to authorise EU withdrawl?	The daily mail in 2016Claimed that the courts blocked Brexit Was accused of homophobia because the mail described a judge as an 'openly gay ex olympic fencer' who sought to frustrate Brexit. IPSO recieved more than 1000 complaints over the matter
Why was the supreme court criticised after their 2016 decision?	Enemies of the people for blocking the popular will expressed in the referendumJudicial activism - Meddling in matters that should have been left to politicians and allowing europhile sympathies to affect their personal judgements Much media speculation about pro-eu positions of individual judges
What is judicial review ?	The power to review actions taken by public bodies on the ground that they are ultra viresWhere they act beyond the law, they can stop them and to review acts of parliament to see if they are compatible with the HRATherefore the court upholds the rule of law
Why did Unison challenge the government in 2017?	Unison (union, pressure group) challenged the fees order of 2013, which transferred some of the costs of employment tribunals to those bringing claims, with the objective of stopping claims without merit and encouraging early settlement (79% drop in such cases in over three years)The fees order, which made fees of up to £1,600 payable by claimants was quashed because it was ruled ultra vires. Unlawful because it had the effect of preventing access to justice, which is inherent in the rule of law. The justice minister, Raab, stated that the gov would cease taking fees immediatly and reinbursed claimants dating back to 2013, around £32m
How many declarations of incompatibility were issued by courts in the UK between 2000 and 2023??	46 declarations. 10 have been overturned on appeal
Why did Boris Johnson prorogue Parliament?	Because it meant that Parliament would have far less time to sort out a plan to block a No Deal Brexit, before the Brexit deadline. The prorogation was longer than historically usual
What was the outcome of Miller V the PM (2019)	The court unamimously ruled that the appeal was justicable, as the courts have jurisdiction to rule upon the existance and limits to a prerogative powersThe court ruled that prorogation should be quashed as it prevented Parliament from carrying out its constituional functions of sovereignty and holding executive to account
What was the reaction to the 2019 supreme court ruling by the right?	Ruling dominated the newspapers with headlines such as 'who runs Britain' and 'what's lawful about denying 17.4m Brexit'. Rees Smogg declared the ruling as a 'constituional coup'
Essay plan - is the Supreme court independent and neutral?	ForAgainst                 The CRA enforced a strict seperation of powers by moving the judicial function from the Lords to the Supreme CourtThe biggest threat to judicial independence has been the lack of a strict seperation of powersJudicial independence relies on the commitment of ministers to respecting the independence of judicary Judicial independence is threatened by a growing willingness for ministers to publically criticise the courtsE.g Theresa may courts make uk unsafeRees smogg - constitutionalCoup Judges recognise the limits to their roleJudges are arguably taking a more judicially active roleJudges need to ensure the the confidence of the public in their impartialityIncreasing attacks by the media on the character of judges rather than their decisions plus the more public role of senior judges undermines impartiality The judiciary is slowly becoming more diverseBiased judiciary due to their background
How is the supreme court kept independent and neutral?	Judges are paid sufficient salaries to ensure integrity and impartiality. Changes to the salaries must not be used as a means of influencing judicial decision making. Hence why the Senior Salaries Review Body makes recommendations to the government. However, these recommendations need to be voted on in Parliament and are not always passed, especially in times of austerity. Security of tenure - Once they are appointed, judges cannot be sacked, until their retirement age of 70. This means that they cannot be threatened with removal.  Conflicts of interest - Judges must refuse to sit in a case that involves a family member, friend, or personal associate Public activities - Judges may write and give lectures as part of their functions of educating the public, but they must avoid political activity
What did Theresa May say about judges in 2013?	In 2013, Theresa May accused judges of making the UK more dangerous by ignoring rules aimed at deporting more foreign criminals due to their belief that article 8 (right to family life) could not be curbed. A good example is Aso Mohammed Ibrahim, who faced deportation as an illegal migrant but was allowed to remain after a judge ruled that he had established a family life
How much have judicial review cases risen from 2000?	4240 in 2000 to around 15,600 in 2013 Suggests a rise in 'judicial activism'
Essay plan - do the courts have too much power	YesNo                 Judicial review limits the power of executive branch as courts can declare actions of the executive to be ultra vires or in breach of HRAUnison Case - fees order ruled ultra vires The rulings by the court are within the laws which are set by Parliament. Parliamentary sovereignty means that the executive can change the law. Acts of Parliament can be declared incompatible with the HRA In 2004, it was ruled by law lords that the Clause of the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001, allowing indefinite detention of foreign terror suspects without trial was incompatible with article 5 and 14 of ECHR. The Anti Terrorism, Crime and Security Act (2001) was not invalidated, but government chose to change the law. There has been a large increase in the number of judicial review cases, and this is limiting the ability of the democratically elected government to deliverE.g. Rwanda data2data1data2
Why is the lack of diversity on the supreme court a concern?	Because reflects the interests and positions of upper class, oxbridge educated men            The fact that it has only one female member was significant in the case of Radmacher v Granatino (2010)
What parts of the Maastricht Treaty was Major able to secure 'opt outs' from?	Social chapter - workers protections (later joined by Blair)Joining the Eurozone
How many countries joined the EU in 2004?	10 countries  Eastern Europe.  Slovenia, Slovakia, Malta, Poland, Lithuania, Hungary, Latvia, Czech Republic
How many consumers and businesses are in the single market?	450 million consumers22.5 million small and medium sized enterprisesAllows for greater economies of scale, and increases competition, comparative advantage
What happened at the Treaty of Amserdam in 1997	1997: The Amsterdam Treaty is signed, further developing security policy and starts the process of developing employment and social protection policies
What was the Factortame case and when was it?	The Common Fisheries Policies is used to manage fishing fleets and fish stocks                 In 1990, a Spanish fishing company, Factortame, sued the UK government for restricting its access to UK waters. The law lords, who formed the highest UK court at the time, followed the European Court of Justice in ruling that the 1988 Merchant Shipping Act, which the government was using to support its position, could not be allowed to stand because it violated EU law. This controversial case established the primacy of EU law over an act of parliament . https://amp.theguardian.com/law/2019/mar/29/landmarks-in-law-the-90s-fishing-case-that-stoked-uk-euroscepticism       ECJ ruled that the act was inconsistent with EU law.
What percent of UK regulation originated in the UK?	80% -Hence why government wants to scrap retained EU law
How does the Common Agricultural Policy work?	Provides direct income support to farmersProvides money for rural developmentMost expensive part of EU budget
Why did EU law have primacy over UK law in areas where it had competence?	Because of the 1972 European Communities Act. This was why the ECJ was able to overturn the Merchant Shipping Act 1988
Can devolution be reversed?	Scotland Act (2016) and Wales Act (2017) recognise that devolution settlements can only be reversed via referendumChallenges the principle of Parliamentary sovereignty
Why was the Afghan Hijackers ruling controversial? When was it?	In 2006, the high court ruled that 9 Afghan men, who hijacked an aircraft to escape the Taliban, had the right to remain in the UK under the HRATony Blair called the ruling an 'abuse of common sense'
What did the supreme court rule on the governments £500 a week benefits cap? When	In 2015 In 2015 a pressure group known as SHAC (social housing action group) sought judicial review that the government’s benefit cap was unlawful on grounds of discrimination   Supreme court rules that £500 - a-week cap is lawful but incompatible with UK obligations under the UN convention on rights of the child
Does the EU still have juridiction over the UK?	Yes - in terms of the Windsor Framework and And TCA (Trade and Co-operation Agreement) - means that there has to be a 'level playing field
What is the Common Fisheries Policy?	Grands all member states equal access to the waters of all member statesSets quotas and regulations for the number of certain types of fish that are caughtThe UK has some of the largest areas of prime fishing under it's control. It is widely believed that allowing fleets from Spain and Portrugal to have free access has triggered a terminal decline in the British industryThe quotas and regulation and have failed to reverse the long term decline of various fish stocks, instead led to fishermen throwing dead wish back into the sea
Why was the CAP controversial in the UK	A guarenteed minimum price - EU buys surplus stocks if prices fall bellow an agreed level. Protects farmers from being undercut by cheaper products and ensures that arable land stays in production. UK farming industry is relatively small compared to France, Italy and Spain, It is percieved that the UK, which was the third largest contributer to the EU budget after Germany and France, that the UK was subsdising inefficient European farmers. Concerns about wasted food - butter mountains and wine lakes
Was EU migration a drain on the UK welfare system?	NoThe tax revenue from EU citizens working from the UK exceeded the costs incurred by welfare recipients from the EU.In 2016, UCL academics Professor Christian Dustmann and Dr. Tommasso Frattini calculated that EU migrats were less likely to claim benefits and on average contribute more to the UK econoy than natve British citizens
How much did the UK contribute to the EU budget in 2019?	In 2019, the UK paid about £19bn into the EU budget,Recieved a rebate of £4.5billion and recieved back £5bn in payments to poorer regions E.g. Northern Ireland, CornwallSo - the net contribution of £9.4billion equated to only 1% of public expenditure
Who was the EU chief Brexit negotiator?	Michelle Barnier, who worked to 'protect the integrity of the single market'
Which trade deal did the UK join in 2023? Why did unions condemn the move?	In March 2023, Britain joined the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership.(CPTPP) This will lead to a 0.08% increase in UK GDP over 10 years.
Why did unions condemn the UK joining the CPTPP	Includes an investor-state dispute mechanism, which allows corporations to sue governments when regulations change and deny them profits. Flint Global said that CPTPP membership would harm the UKs ability to rejion EU, as harmonising trade rules with CPTPP countries would drive a wedge between Brussels. Tiny impact because the countries are very far away. The UK already had free trade agreements with 9 of the 11 countries, many had rolled over from EU free trade agreements.
How is supreme court pay decided?	It is suggested by the Salaries Review body and then ratified by Parliament
How does the Trade and Co-operation agreement affect UK law today?	The TCA in particular contains obligations that are intended to create a level playing field between the EU and the UK so that businesses in one place or the other do not benefit from a less stringent regulatory environment. If deregulation is a result of the Retained EU Law Bill, then there will be careful analysis by the EU of whether those level playing field provisions are breached.
What are judicial inquiries? What are they used for?	These are launched by the government when some aspect of public policy or other conduct has gone so seriously wrong that it merits a full judicial investigation into all the facts and the evidence surrounding the policy or the event. They are open inquiries and their findings are published by the Judge heading the Inquiry. Most notable inquiries have been the Hutton Inquiry, The Scott Inquiry, The Leveson Inquiry, the Saville Inquiry and the Chilcot Inquiry.
What is judicial independence?	The idea that the judiciary is free of political interference and that they can make their decisions in accordance with their judicial oath “without fear or favour”. They cannot be easily removed from office, their pay is guaranteed by the consolidated fund, judicial appointments are no longer made under the PMs exercise of patronage (instead they are made by the independent Judicial Appointments Commission) and the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 formally separated the Law Lords from legislature creating a wholly independent Supreme Court. Politicians must not comment on matters which are subject to proceedings before the courts.
What is judicial neutrality?	The idea here is that judges are free from political bias. They apply and interpret the law in a neutral way and have no bias or interest in a particular outcome of any case.Judges should not openly engage in party political matters and should not allow personal or political preferences to influence their decisions.
What is judicial review?	The process whereby an executive action/ministerial decision or that taken by other public bodies such as local authorities, public corporations or the police can be legally challenged in court on the grounds that the government minister, department or other public body has exceeded the lawful powers available to them (ultra vires) or that the decision amounts to an unreasonable one, or was in any event procedurally unfair. As government departments and other public bodies increasingly rely upon statutory instruments the number of judicial reviews (legal challenges by individual citizens, charities or pressure groups has also increased significantly)
Why has the number of judicial reviews increased so much in the past few years?	Because there has been a huge increase in the amount of delegated legislation. Brexit led to a spike in secondary legislation according to the IFG
What are the 5 challenges to Parliamentary sovereignty in the UK?	Devolution Globalisation Human Rights Act (1998) and ECHR EU Executive overreach
Why did the Supreme Court declare that the government acted Ultra Vires in the case Treasury v Mohammed Jabar Ahmed and others (2010)?	3 Brothers were suspected by the UK government fundraising for Al-Qaeda. All three denied it, they had no terrorism related offenses, but the Tresury froze all their assets, to stop them funding terrorists.       In April 2009 Judge Collins sitting in the High Court ruled that the asset freezing orders was ultra vires and quashed them.           Following an appeal by the government of the High Court decision, the Supreme Court Justices in the case ruled that HM Treasury had acted ultra vires by imposing the asset-freezing order and ruled that it should be overturned by 6-1. In particular, the justices noted that it was unreasonable that the order could not be contested in court (as any criminal charge could be.    But the government quickly responsed by passing the Terrorist Asset Freezing Act. - ultimately Parliament is sovereign
Why should judges have more power?	▪  They play a key role, particularly when conducting judicial reviews, in ensuring that government and other public bodies operate within the law and do not abuse their power.     ▪  They also have a role (along with Parliament) in ensuring that human rights and freedoms are upheld.     ▪  Judges are not politicians and are independent from politics. They are, therefore, in a strong position to   prevent abuses of power by governments who may wish to gain political advantage.     ▪  They uphold the rule of law, whereby all citizens are treated equally under the law. This prevents   governments and public bodies from treating people unequally for political gain.     ▪  While politicians are often influenced by varying public opinion, judges can operate strictly within the law   and so prevent abuses of power or human rights which may take place merely to satisfy the short-term public mood.
Why should judges have less power?	▪  Judges are not elected and are, therefore, not accountable. This means they may make judgements which take no account of the national interest or public opinion. Neither Parliament nor the public has any way of calling judges to account, so their power should be controlled.     ▪  Judges sometimes make rulings that may prevent the government from carrying out its functions and political mandate. In cases where there is a dispute between the power of government and the power of judges, it is argued that democracy demands that government should prevail.     ▪  When upholding EU law or the European Convention on Human Rights, UK judges are sometimes challenging the sovereignty of Parliament, a key principle of the UK constitution.     ▪  It has been argued by some commentators that the UK's senior judiciary is out of touch because its members come from such a narrow social background, being largely educated at private schools and Oxbridge.
What are judge led inquiries?	These are quasi-judicial proceedings that investigate an issue, usually one that is politically controversial. The purpose of referring the issue to a public inquiry is to try to take the issue out of the political arena and allow it to be independently investigated
Also the Chilcot Inquirity (Iraq Inquiry, 2016) Hallett Inquiry.  Stephen Lawrence Inquiry.	
What is the difference of the De Jure and De Factor Sovereignty?	De jure - by lawDe Facto - by factLegal sovereignty incontestably lies with Parliament in the UK. It lies there because of all the factors that A.V Dicey had laid out. A.V Dicey himself recognised, however, that there was a difference between legal and political sovereignty.       Whilst power belongs to Parliament, it is clear that ultimately Parliament is beholden to the population (through what is known as popular sovereignty). If Parliament does not accede to the broader wishes of the electorate then it will be removed, either via a general election or, ultimately, if it is needed, via revolution. Therefore, the electorate is politically sovereign, and this impacts the way that Parliament operate.
What are the instituions of the European Union?	European Commission – The European Commission is the executive branch of the EU.Its key responsibility is to propose and then implement EU policies and laws.Council of Ministers – The decision making EU. It consists of representatives from member states. European Parliament - The legislature. . It can adopt, amend or reject EU laws. European Court of Justice – The judicary.  Its responsibility is to adjudicate on EU disputes and ensure that member states are complying with EU law.
Which Act established the EU Single Market and Four freedoms?	The Single European Act 1986.
Evaluate the view that the supreme court has too much power  (Mock paper 2022)	Too much powerNot too much power                 1) Judicial review means that judges can issue a 'declaration of incompatibility'.  This is what happened - The supreme court is only upholding the principles of Parliamentary soveriegnty, as the HRA is an act of Parliament.  - The supreme court does not have the power to 'strike down' an act of Parliament. Technically the lack of prisoners voting rights is against the HRA and EHCR. But judges cannot compel the government to change their course.  Also, not necessarily a bad thing because the Supreme Court can protect rights and impose checks and balances. 2) Judicial review allows unelected, unaccountable and unrepresentative court to declare data23) Becoming increasingly political.  Stopped Theresa May from invoking article 50 without the consent of Parliament.  Stopped Boris Johnson to prorogue Parliament.  Courts stoppingThis is a defence of the principles of Parliamentary sovereignty.
Why might we argue that the EU eroded UK sovereignty?	Primary of community law over UK law, as established by the 1972 European Communities Act. ECJ ruled in the Factortame case that the Merchant and Shipping Act violated EU law.The ECJ also ruled that the Investagatory powers Act was unlawful becauseit is an indiscriminate retention of emails. The EU also ruled that the government had broken EU laws by denying men cut price travel passes until 65, whilst women qualified at 60. Sovereignty was compromised through the Customs union. The UK could not sign external FTA with other countries, because tragde agreements were created by the European Commission.  Now the UK can embark on a 'buccaneering Brexit' and strike free trade deals with other countries. For example, Kemi Badenoch recently signed the CPTPP, which will contribute a whopping 0.08% extra to GDP. Sovereignty was limited by the membership of the single market.  UK had to accept the four freedoms. This included free movement within the EU. As a result, David Cameron was unable to get migration down to the 'tens of thousands'  Government could not for example impose protectionist measures or subsidies it's industries, or slash regulations, because there has to be a 'level playing field' within the single market. Qualified majority voting - Treaty of Lisbon extended QMV in 43 new areas. This means that there are many areas where the UK did not have a veto over, and would have to accept the legislation passed by the European commission, even if it had not been in favour of it. For example, George Osbourne and David Cameron vociferously oopposed the EU wide cap on bankers bonuses, but they had to accept it because it was EU wide legislation
Why might we argue that EU membership did not erode sovereignty?	Parliament retains the sovereignty to leave.  Article 50 of the EU allows member states to leave the EU without needing permission from other member states. This is what the government did in 2020.EU only legislates in areas where it has competency. Not everwhere.  Laws to do with the single market and the customs union, and health and safety regulations are part of the EU remit because the effect competition. But health, education, NHS budget is the sole jurisdiction of the UK. Pooling of sovereignty.  The customs union meant more bargaining power for countries to achieve more favourable trade deals. Countries want to strike up a trade deal with the EU because it is 27 countries. The UK effectively lost sovereignty because we cannot achieve such favourable trade deals. The US has made it clear that we are at the back of the queue. Single market legislation is necessary to achieve the benefits Some regulations and abdication of soverereignty is required to 'protect the integrity of the single market'. It made little sense to leave because although we now have 'control' over our borders, we have to deal with friction and queues at dover. The UK can secure opt-outs from legislation that it does not like.  In many aresa, the UK is not effected becasue it has opt outs in measures. E.g. Euro Membership, Schengen agreement
	
	
Evaluate the view that Parliament is no longer sovereign   Use concepts such as executive sovereignty (elective dictatorship), popular sovereignty, judicial sovereignty, legal sovereignty.  Discuss concepts - EU, devolution, executive/legislature, judidicary, referendums,	NOYes                 - Executive is sovereign. Government dominates Parliament through  1) Standing order 14.  2) Whipping system. Party loyalty and ambition coerces people to toe the party line.  3) Ministerial responsibility. Payroll vote of 120 voteds.  4) Elective dictatorship - Very limited checks and balances. E.g. Parliament Acts- Parliament can still asserts itself. We saw that in the Brexit years.  - Largest rebellion in commons history in 2013. Even Ministers like Amber Rudd ignored the three line whip and gov could not do anything.  - MPs wrestled control of the order paper through an emergency debate and were able to pass a Benn Act, which prevented the government from implimenting a no deal Brexit.   - Meg Russell notes that there are many rebellions dehind the scene. For example, the government u-turned on housebuilding committements.  - Removal of hereditaries has made for a more assertive lords. They are willing to challenge the government. For example on cuts to benfits in 2015. Devolution has undermined sovereignty -  - Scotland Act 2016 and Wales Act 2017 identify the devolved bodies as permenant constituional function and are not to be abolished without a referendum.  - Sewel convention shows that there has been a loss of sover- According ot AV Dicey no Parliament can bind a successor Parliament  - Sewel Convention was not respected when the UK left the EU without the consent of the devolved bodies.  This was despite the fact that Scotland voted 62% to remain. - Government still can abolish devolved instituions. Thatcher abolished the GLC in 1986 - Most significant areas are still resserved for Westminister. E.g. Foreign policy, defence.  - Parliament still holds the purse strings (Barnett formula). The devolved bodies are dependent on their 'pocket money'. - The UK is still not fully sovereign even in a post EU world.  - Although it theoretically has the choice to diverge on policy, in reality it does not.  The 'Brussels effect' forces the UK to submit to EU rules. Divergence is harmful because there needs to be an 'equal playing field'. The government cannot transform the economy into 'Singapore on Thames' because under the TCA, there must be a 'level playing field' - However, becasuse the UK is no longer subject to EU law it has much more leeway.  - Can now introduce controls on EU migration. - The UK removed the 2x cap of bankers bonuses which the EU introduced post crash.  - No longer has to submit to QMV. Therefore we could argue that Parliament is much more soveriegn than it was in 2020. Popular sovereignty -  The public voted in a referendum to impliment Brexit. - Majority of MPs and Lords were in favour of remain, but they had to submit because they felt bound by the 'will of the people' - Parliament was still legally sovereign. It decided to call the referendum in the first place - Parliament manged the entire Brexit agreement. Soft vs Hard Brexit. The final battle was determined in Parliament. Parliament is still sovereignt. Judicial tyranny - The judicary has become increasinly 'activist' in recent yeras. (Lord Sumption).  - The Law Lords ruled in 2004 that the indefinite detention of foreign terror suspects violated the HRA.  Gina Miller 1 and 2. 'enemies of the people'. what's lawful about denying 17.4 million Brexit- The HRA is merely an Act of Parliament which can be removed from the statute book.  Also judgges cannot 'strike down' legislation, but they can only issue a declaration. It just invites Parliament to relegislate.  - The indefinite detention was replaced with control orders.
Evaluate the view that judges should not exercise control over the power of government.	Should not Should                 Judicial tyranny  - This country is governed by the rule of law, which is not the same as 'rule of the judges'.  - The country voted 52% in favour of Brexit. Theresa May should have been able to trigger article 50. without controversy. Their exercise of control is them undermining the 'will of the people'. The government was 'in it's rights to use the royal prerogative.'. One of the prerogative powers  - Executive tyranny- Judicial activism.  - They are acting on their Europhile tendancies rather than upholidng the rule of law. data2Unelected and unaccountable. data2
Evaluate the view that the UK's constituion requires major change	Flexible  Effective government. No gridlock but can easily get things done Democratic RuleUncertainty / inadequate rights protection.  Lack of checks and balances. Excessively centralised                   Flexible - 'The Constitution has changed dramatically from an all powerful monarchy to a constituional monarchy with parliamentary sovereignty. Able to adapt to changing circulstamces, such as Scottish nationalism, calls for reform, etc. E.g. Wright reforms Uncertainty - Unwritten constitution creates a lot of ambiguity and dispute.  - Was the prorogation legal? Was Theresa May within her rights to invoke Article 50? Does the SNP have the jurisdiction to call an independence referendum? Effective government - codified constituion like in the US would cause gridlock. e.g. '2/3 majority in parliament'.  - Parliament can respond effectively to threats. For example, the UK government introduced control orders in 2005, and the investatory powers act in 2016. Lack of checks and balances for a government  - E.g. Elections Act 2022 introduced voter ID regulations to try and skew electoral outcomes in favour of the conservatives. The absensce of a codified constituion and formal seperation prevented them from doing this. Democratic rule - not judicial tyranny.  - In the US, judges can strike down UK law as 'unconstitutional' This might lead to judicial tyranny. Erosion of rights -  Public order Act - Republic protestors were arrested.
Evaluate the view that the roles and membership of the House of Lords require reform.	Independence. Expertise. Time. Does not require reform. Lack of democratic legitimacy. Overinflated. Faces constraints like parliament acts                   - Independence of thought - 185 Crossbenchers mean that this is a hung chamber. Many members see it as their duty to challenge government and hold them to account. - Environment Act - Lords tabled many amendments to place more regulations on water companies.  - Benefits cap - 2015 the Lords Challenge the government  Lords are there for life, so party whips have very little power over the lords- Many Lords are not placed there due to exceptional qualities, but as a way for the PM to reward donors and loyalty.  - E.g. Peter Cruddas, Evgeny Lebvedev.  - Ruther Porter. Expertise - Many Lords are in the chamber because they have exceptional contributions that they can bring. E.g. Constituional experts like Peter Henessy. Betty Boothroyd (although now decesased. Appointsmen commissions vets all nominations. Many people are in the lords because of favours and donations. They are 'non working'. This has led to allegations that there is an absence of democratic legitimacy.  - Around 800 peers.  - Does not accurately represent the pubilc. Average age of 80. Time - Government is frequently trying to rush through legislation. Heavily whips public Bill Committees. But the Lords is much more able to spend time and scrutinise line by line. data2
Evaluate the view that the supreme court has strenghened Parliamentary sovereignty	head1head2                 - Ignoring the democratically elected referendum, which Parliament voted to allowdata2- Increase of judicial review challenges governmentdata2- Declarations of incompatibiltiy. data2
