#separator:tab
#html:false
Cases where Collective and Individual rights have needed to be balanced (3 name 2)	The Belmarsh 9 case - Resulted in the government releasing detainees from Belmarsh Prison.Attempts to deport Abu Qatada after evidence used against him was foud to be obtained by torture. He was meant to be deported in 2008 but was deported in 2014. 8 years of him still being in the UK.In 2010 the Supreme court ruled homosexuals could claim asylum in the UK if theirsexualisty was the reason for their fleeing as it is their right to be able to express who they are.
Why do Judges not have the same right of protection than codified nations?	Parliament is soverign, it can overrule judges desicions. For example, after belmarsh 9 detainees were released, new legislation was strictly enacted to keep them under close watch. Judges lack the power to strike down legislation, as seen in codified nations like the USA.
Significant Constitutional Reforms (Name 4)	The Magna Carta 1215.The Bill of rights 1869.Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949.European Communities Act 1972.
Why is the British Constitution Unique?	It is uncodified with no entrenched documents. Furthermore, it has not been impacted by revolutionary events such as the USA and France.
What is Parliamentary soverignty?	Parliament is the supreme legislative body. It is free to enact any legislation for which it has an parliamentary majority. There is no authority greater than Parliament who could veto this.
What is the Rule of Law?	That every single person is below the law. Everyone is equally liable under the law, including the government.
What is Statute Law?	Momentuos acts and acts of Parliament that contribute to the development of the UK's constitution.
What are examples of Statute Laws?	The 1911 Parliament Act that removed the HOL's ability to veto decisions. This was significant because it showed the HOC was now the most powerful chamber, therefore making the UK system more democratic and representative of the people as a result of this.Scotland Act 1998 - Significant by devolving Scotland to have it's own Parliament.
What is Common Law?	The way in which the judiciary interprets statute law into the development of case law.
What are examples of common law?	Somerset vs Stewart (1772). Lord Mansfield interpreted slavery as illegal in the UK because it was rejected in common law even though nothing in Statute law justified Slavery, ultimately ending the issue in Britain.
What s a Convention?	The accustomed way in which politcal activity is carried out. It is not constitutionally bounding, meaning they do not even need to be carried out. Their significance is driven from the force of tradition.
What is an example of a Convention?	The Salisbury convention is a convention which stops the HOL from opposing the second and third readings of legislation included in a winning party's manifesto.
What are Authoritative works?	Books and works said to be part of the constitution. Examples include the book by Walter Bagehot called the english constitution (1867).
What are treaties?	A written agreement made between two or more political entities that has constitutional significance. For example, the 1972 acceptance of the EUs law into british law as a result of the 1972 European Communities Act.
Developments of the Constitution since 2010 - 2015?	The Fixed Term Parliament Act 2011.The AV electoral system referendum.Introduction of Backbench committees.Secret Ballot for Select committees - Increasing legitimacy.
Impact of devolution in Scotland	Local government founded.Increased political engagement.74.3% yes to devolution.Ability to enact law ( First UK state to ban pblic smoking etc).
Limitations to 1998 Scottish devolution?	Westminster retains certain powers over issues such as national defence, foreign policy and immigration Differences:  ENG 53.4% leave, Scotland 62% remain.
Wales and Devolution?	Not the same sense of nationalism as Scotland. Only 10%of vote went to plaid cymru in 2017.No enthusiasm, 2006 Government of Wales Act led to a 35% turnout in referendum voting for Wales to enact it's own legislation. Significant amount said Yes.
Arguments for Further UK Devolution?	England is the most populous nation, so why no Parliament?Created an aysymmetric UK. For example spending per capita is less in England than the rest of the UK. Devolution could solve this.Strong regional sense of identity in parts of the UK such as North Yorkshire.
Arguments agains Further / English Devolution?	Westminster could be challenged by an England parliament.Not all parts of england have strong regional identity, North East rejected its own assembly by 78% in 2004.Another layer of gov can cause a democratic overload, decreasing legitimacy of results.
Points to why the UK should not have a constitution?	Evolutionary change and easy ammendment to laws is useful.For example, in the 1960s, Parliament could quickly abolish capital punishment without the need for a long and complicated parliamentary precedure.
What are Party Whips?	Appointed by parties to maintain party discipline. They require MPS to vote and vote according to the demands of the party leadership in Parliament. If MPs refuse to carry out whip obligations, they will lose Party Membership.
What does the Speaker of HOC do?	Does not engage in political debate. Ensures Parliament functions as effectivley as possible as a result. Can also suspend MPs who are delibrately abusive and disobedient. Elected by secret ballot by all MPs.
What is the Legitimation function carried out by HOC?	Parliaments main functin is to consent parliamentary bills before they can be enacted. For example, PMs have allowed Parliament to debate large scale military commitments before taking any actions since Iraq in 2003.
How many PMs have come to power as a result of resignations?	5/8. They come to power by replacing predessecors or winning a general election whilst being asked by the monarch.
What is secondary legislation?	The process of which primary legislation can be amended without the passing of another act of parliament.
What powers does the prime minister have in stock?	Determining who is in government.Appoints life peers to the HOL.Directs millitary forces into combat.Decides whether to launch Trident missiles.
What is Individual Responsibility?	The principle that cabinet ministers take ultimate responsibility for what occurs in their departments including both administrative and policy failures.
Example of Individual responsibility because of administrative failure.	In 1954, Sir Thomas Dugle resigned as minister of agriculture over failing to return land to it's rightful owner after WW2.
Example of Individual Responsibility and Policy Failure?	In 1982, Lord Carrington resigned as the foreign secretary for Margaret Thathcer because he said the Foreign office should have been more aware of Argentina's intentions when the UK invaded the Fawklands. He failed to make it clear what the British government's intentions were regarding military intervention.
What is Collective Ministerial responsibility?	Where the whole government has to resign as a result of a vote of no confidence. It also causes government members to forcibly publicly support government policy or resign.
Example of vote of no confidence collective ministerial responsibility?	In 1979, James Callaghan was defeated by 311 votes to 310. Causing a general election and Callaghan's government to resign.
Example of disagreeing and collective ministerial responsibility?	In 2003, Robert Cook resigned from Tony Blair's government over disagreeing to his preparations to invade Iraq.
Example of where collective ministerial responsibility was abandonned?	In 2016, David Cameron suspended Collective responsibility to avoid high - profile resignations from ministers such as Ian - Duncan - Smith who disagreed on government policy to remain in the EU around the EU referendum.
Functions of the Cabinet?	Approve desicions made by the executive.Determine key isssues of policy.Decide how the government will determine business.Solving disputes.
Example of PM showing dominance over the Cabinet?	Margaret Thatcher advanced key positions to allies of her's such as William Whitelaw, her first home secretary who loyally shared her political views.
What is a cabinet government?	A type of government in which the cabinet plays a key role in the development of policy. Decreasing in frequency since Harold Wilsons government.
What is a Prime - Ministerial government?	A model of overnment where the PM is dominant an the cabinet is relegated to a subordinate decision - making role.
Example of a Prime - MInisterial government?	Harold Wilson preffered to make desicions through a small body of advisors in his Downing Street flat dubbed the '' Kitchen Cabinet''. It included his friends and key allies.
Example of a Cabinet Government?	In 2018, Theresa May summoned the whole government to Chequers in order to make a united approach  to the sort of Brexit Deal the UK would pursue.
What is the role of the supreme court?	The Supreme court's role is to act as the final court of appeal, set legal precedents which can be reffered to future cases and judicially review how the government has acted.
Why and what established the Supreme Court?	The Constitutional reform Act (2005). It established the Supreme court ( eventually in 2009) to replace the law lords.
What is the composition of the supreme court?	Privately educated mostly attending Oxford or Cambridge.Male dominated. In 2019 3/12 judges were women.Makes it unrepresentative.
What is Judicial Neutrality	A central principle of the rule of law that states judges must be intependent from parliament in order to avoid any control or persuasion. Parliament is not allowed to express an opinion that would breach the seperation of power.
How is the Judiciary Neutral and independent?	Judges are not permitted to be a member of a political party.Independent Consolidated Fund pays judges salaries. Notlinked to Parliament.Judges are not allowed to sit in the presence of family or friends to avoid a subconsious bias towards them in their judgement.
Example of Judicial Neutrality?	In 2014, Abu Qatada was finally deported after an 8 year fight. This shows Judicial neutrality by showing no matter how bad/good a person is, they are not excluded from fair judgement.
Example of where the Supreme Court has determined the meaning of Law?	In R v Jogee (2016) the Supreme court interpreted a law passed by Parliament that stated all aquaintences to a murderer were charged with murder to only be charged with murder if they were found to have an intent to kill. This became established common law and was interpreted for future case law.
Example of where the Supreme Court has ruled Ultra Vires.	In 2016, The Supreme court ruled Chris Grayling to be acting Ultra vires when he amended the legal aid act. He did not have the authority to introduce secondary legislaion individually.
Example of the Supreme Court determining soverignty in the UK?	The Gina Miller Case (2017) stated that Parliament did not have authority to use royal perrogative to leave the European Union. Instead it needed to enact legislation in order to remove the UK from the European Union.
Example of the Supreme Court giving a declaration of Incompatibility?	In 2004, the Law Lords saw the Belmarsh 9 case as being discriminatory according to the ECHR. Caused Blair to release suspects.
What does the Royal perrogative do?	Gives the PM the power to use British Military forces without consulting Parliament legally.
Example of Royal Perrogative?	In 2018, Theresa May used royal errogative for air strikes on Syria without the permission of a consulted Parliament.
An Example of weak Parliamentary influence?	In 1997 Tony Blair's landslide victory meant he had a 179 seat majority. Caused Tories to have little say in debate at the time.
Example of Strng Parliamentary influence?	Theresa May's snap election in2017 led her to getting a minority government. She had to rely on a confidence and supply agreement with the DUP in order to remain in power. Shows strong Parliamentary influence.
