Elizabeth I and the Duchess

The following is taken from: https://www.rmg.co.uk/stories/topics/queen-elizabeth-speech-troops-tilbury 
Queen Elizabeth I used her power over language to frame the narrative of the Spanish Armada.
The speech she is supposed to have delivered to her troops on 9 August 1588 has become one of the defining moments in British history.
When was the Tilbury Speech made?
Fear of invasion by Spain remained high in England, especially with the action of the Spanish Armada taking place so close to England's shores. As a result, the ageing Robert Dudley was put in charge of the land army at Tilbury, on the Thames, to the east of London in Essex.
Dudley arranged for Queen Elizabeth to visit Tilbury to announce his appointment and rally the troops on 9 August 1588. The queen's reported words during that visit has gone down in history. Read it in full below.



My loving people,

We have been persuaded by some that are careful of our safety to take heed how we commit ourselves to armed multitudes, for fear of treachery. But I assure you, I do not desire to live to distrust my faithful and loving people.

Let tyrants fear. I have always so behaved myself that, under God, I have placed my chiefest strength and safeguard in the loyal hearts and good-will of my subjects; and therefore I am come amongst you, as you see, at this time, not for my recreation and disport, but being resolved, in the midst and heat of the battle, to live and die amongst you all; to lay down for my God, and for my kingdom, and my people, my honour and my blood, even in the dust.

I know I have the body of a weak and feeble woman; but I have the heart and stomach of a king, and of a king of England too, and think foul scorn that Parma or Spain, or any prince of Europe, should dare to invade the borders of my realm: to which rather than any dishonour shall grow by me, I myself will take up arms, I myself will be your general, judge, and rewarder of every one of your virtues in the field.

I know already, for your forwardness you have deserved rewards and crowns; and We do assure you on a word of a prince, they shall be duly paid. In the mean time, my lieutenant general shall be in my stead, than whom never prince commanded a more noble or worthy subject; not doubting but by your obedience to my general, by your concord in the camp, and your valour in the field, we shall shortly have a famous victory over these enemies of my God, of my kingdom, and of my people.

Act 3, scene 3
Scene III[92]

       [Enter] CARDINAL, FERDINAND, MALATESTI, PESCARA, DELIO,
       and SILVIO

  CARDINAL.  Must we turn soldier, then?

  MALATESTI.                              The emperor,
  Hearing your worth that way, ere you attain'd
  This reverend garment, joins you in commission
  With the right fortunate soldier the Marquis of Pescara,
  And the famous Lannoy.

  CARDINAL.               He that had the honour
  Of taking the French king prisoner?

  MALATESTI.                           The same.
  Here 's a plot drawn for a new fortification
  At Naples.

  FERDINAND.  This great Count Malatesti, I perceive,
  Hath got employment?

  DELIO.                No employment, my lord;
  A marginal note in the muster-book, that he is
  A voluntary lord.

  FERDINAND.         He 's no soldier.

  DELIO.  He has worn gun-powder in 's hollow tooth for the tooth-ache.

  SILVIO.  He comes to the leaguer with a full intent
  To eat fresh beef and garlic, means to stay
  Till the scent be gone, and straight return to court.

  DELIO.  He hath read all the late service
  As the City-Chronicle relates it;
  And keeps two pewterers going, only to express
  Battles in model.

  SILVIO.            Then he 'll fight by the book.

  DELIO.  By the almanac, I think,
  To choose good days and shun the critical;
  That 's his mistress' scarf.

  SILVIO.                       Yes, he protests
  He would do much for that taffeta.

  DELIO.  I think he would run away from a battle,
  To save it from taking prisoner.

  SILVIO.                           He is horribly afraid
  Gun-powder will spoil the perfume on 't.

  DELIO.  I saw a Dutchman break his pate once
  For calling him pot-gun; he made his head
  Have a bore in 't like a musket.

  SILVIO.  I would he had made a touch-hole to 't.
  He is indeed a guarded sumpter-cloth,[93]
  Only for the remove of the court.

       [Enter BOSOLA]

  PESCARA.  Bosola arriv'd!  What should be the business?
  Some falling-out amongst the cardinals.
  These factions amongst great men, they are like
  Foxes, when their heads are divided,
  They carry fire in their tails, and all the country
  About them goes to wrack for 't.

  SILVIO.                           What 's that Bosola?

  DELIO.  I knew him in Padua,-a fantastical scholar, like such who
  study to know how many knots was in Hercules' club, of what colour
  Achilles' beard was, or whether Hector were not troubled with the
  tooth-ache.  He hath studied himself half blear-eyed to know the true
  symmetry of Caesar's nose by a shoeing-horn; and this he did to gain
  the name of a speculative man.

  PESCARA.  Mark Prince Ferdinand:
  A very salamander lives in 's eye,
  To mock the eager violence of fire.

  SILVIO.  That cardinal hath made more bad faces with his oppression
  than ever Michael Angelo made good ones.  He lifts up 's nose, like
  a foul porpoise before a storm.

  PESCARA.  The Lord Ferdinand laughs.

  DELIO.                                Like a deadly cannon
  That lightens ere it smokes.

  PESCARA.  These are your true pangs of death,
  The pangs of life, that struggle with great statesmen.

  DELIO.  In such a deformed silence witches whisper their charms.

  CARDINAL.  Doth she make religion her riding-hood
  To keep her from the sun and tempest?

  FERDINAND.  That, that damns her.  Methinks her fault and beauty,
  Blended together, show like leprosy,
  The whiter, the fouler.  I make it a question
  Whether her beggarly brats were ever christ'ned.

  CARDINAL.  I will instantly solicit the state of Ancona
  To have them banish'd.

  FERDINAND.              You are for Loretto:
  I shall not be at your ceremony; fare you well.-
  Write to the Duke of Malfi, my young nephew
  She had by her first husband, and acquaint him
  With 's mother's honesty.

  BOSOLA.                    I will.

  FERDINAND.                          Antonio!
  A slave that only smell'd of ink and counters,
  And never in 's life look'd like a gentleman,
  But in the audit-time.-Go, go presently,
  Draw me out an hundred and fifty of our horse,
  And meet me at the foot-bridge.
       Exeunt.


