https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover
UK Government
1 The Constitution
● 1.2 How the constitution has changed since 1997.
○ Under Labour 1997–2010: House of Lords reforms, electoral reform;
devolution; Human Rights Act 1998; and the Supreme Court.
○ Under the Coalition 2010–15: Fixed Term Parliaments Act 2011; further
devolution to Wales.
○ Any major reforms undertaken by governments since 2015, including further
devolution to Scotland (in the context of the Scottish Referendum).
● 1.4 Debates on further reform.
○ An overview of the extent to which the individual reforms since 1997 listed in
section 1.2 above should be taken further.
○ The extent to which devolution should be extended in England.
○ Whether the UK constitution should be changed to be entrenched and
codified, including a bill of rights.
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓
🗣 Key Debates 🗣
● The key debates are:
○ Whether the UK Constitution should be codified and entrenched.
○ The impact and significance of constitutional reforms since 1997.
○ Whether the UK Constitution requires further change.
● If you make detailed essay plans on the questions in bold below, you should be well
prepared for the exam.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 1
❓Practice/Past Paper Questions❓
● Evaluate the view that the UK constitution should be codified and entrenched. (30)
● Evaluate the view that there are more advantages than disadvantages to the UK’s
uncodified constitution. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the UK constitution is fit for purpose. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the constitutional reforms introduced since 1997 improved the British
political system. (30)
● Evaluate the view that New Labour’s constitutional reforms had a positive and
significant impact on the UK Constitution. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the UK constitution requires further change. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the constitutional reforms introduced since 1997 have undermined
the power of Parliament. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the constittuional reforms introduced by New Labour should
be taken further. (30)
● Evaluate the view that constitutional reforms introduced since 2010 have had a
significant impact on the UK constitution. (30)
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover 1
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓ 1
📜 New Labour’s Constitutional Reforms 📜 3
An Introduction To New Labour’s Constitutional Reforms 3
House Of Lords Reform 4
📜Human Rights Act 1998 📜 6
🗳 Electoral Reform 🗳 8
Devolution 10
󰳌 The Supreme Court 󰳌 12
Other Minor Constitutional Changes Introduced By New Labour 13
📜 The Coalition’s Constitutional Reforms 📜 14
An Introduction To The Coalition’s Constitutional Reforms 14
An Overview Of Constitutional Reform Under The Coalition 14
The Fixed Term Parliaments Act 2011 15
󰧻 Further Devolution To Wales 󰧻 16
Reforms Undertaken Since 2015 16
󰧺 Further Devolution To Scotland 󰧺 16
Brexit 16
English Votes For English Laws 17
The Recall Of MPs Act 2015 17
Rishi Sunak’s Use Of A Section 35 Order 17
Further English Devolution 17
📜 The Codification And Entrenchment Of The Constitution 📜 18
What Do ‘Codification’ And ‘Entrenchment’ Mean? 18
Developments In Relation To Codification 18
✅ Arguments For The Codification Of The Constitution ✅ 19
❌ Arguments Against The Codification Of The Constitution ❌ 20
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 2
📜 New Labour’s Constitutional Reforms 📜
An Introduction To New Labour’s Constitutional Reforms
Why Did New Labour Adopt Policies Of Constitutional Reform?
● Constitutional reform had become a more prominent issue in UK politics in the late 20th
century due to the growing popularity of the Liberal Democrats and Labour leader John
Smith, who preceded Tony Blair.
● The growth in support for nationalist movements in Scotland and Wales created pressure
for devolution.
○ Labour also believed they would be able to succeed in devolved elections, whilst the
Conservatives would struggle.
● New Labour had promised not to increase income tax or massively increase public
spending. They were therefore unable to appear as a party of radical change and hope in
these areas.
○ Constitutional reform allowed Labour to seem like a party with a clear vision of
change and hope without pledging to spend huge sums of money.
● New Labour sought to present itself as a modern, democratic and ‘new’ party, especially in
comparison to the Conservative Party and government, which had countless ‘sleaze’
scandals.
The Four Key Principles Of New Labour’s Constitutional Reform Programme
● (1) Democratisation - reforming the undemocratic features of the UK constitution and
extending democracy.
● (2) Decentralisation - dispersing power from central government to devolved bodies and
local government.
● (3) Restoration of Rights - bringing Britain in line with the rest of Europe and better
protecting the rights of citizens.
● (4) Modernisation - Reforming both the House of Commons and House of Lords to improve
the effectiveness of Parliament.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 3
House Of Lords Reform
What Reforms Were Introduced?
Why New Labour Sought To Reform The House Of Lords:
● The majority of peers in the House of Lords were ‘hereditary peers’ who were there
because they came from aristocratic families.
● The House of Lords was unelected and therefore seen as undemocratic.
● The House of Lords had a strong Conservative majority due to its hereditary nature.
New Labour’s Plan To Reform The House Of Lords:
● New Labour adopted a two stage plan to reform the House of Lords, as there was a
recognition that there was agreement on the key weakness of the Lords, but disagreement
over what should replace it.
○ Stage 1 would remove all hereditary peers.
○ Stage 2 would replace the House of Lords with a new second chamber.
How Reform Turned Out In Practice:
● Stage 1 was carried out in the 1999 House of Lords Act.
○ The Act removed the vast majority of hereditary peers (reduced the number from
777 to just 92). The 92 hereditary peers remained as a compromise with the Lords,
so that the bill would pass quicker.
■ From 2000, the House of Lords Appointment Commission began to
nominate ‘life peers’ who were experts in their fields and not necessarily
linked to a party (many became crossbenchers). The Prime Minister and
other party leaders continued to be able to nominate peers, though.
● Stage 2 was meant to follow this, but never did as many Labour MPs felt the key problems
of hereditary peers and Conservative dominance had been dealt with, whilst there was a
lack of agreement on what the new chamber should look like.
In What Ways Were These Reforms Positive and Significant?
● New Labour’s House of Lords reform undermined the hereditary basis of the House of
Lords and removed its in-built Conservative majority.
● New ‘life peers’ have made the House of Lords more professional and significant, which
has also allowed it to become more assertive and effectively constrain executive power,
whilst still clearly remaining the second chamber.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 4
In What Ways Were These Reforms Limited?
● House of Lords reform never went the whole way, with failed attempts at ‘stage 2’ in 2003,
2007 and 2012.
○ The House of Lords is therefore still undemocratic.
● There are still 92 hereditary peers in the House of Lords.
○ There are also still 26 bishops in the House of Lords
● Ex Prime Ministers are still able to make appointments to the House of Lords which is seen
as problematic.
The Debate Over Further Reforms To The House Of Lords
Arguments For The House Of Lords Being Replaced With An Elected Second Chamber:
● The House of Lords is fundamentally undemocratic. The second chamber should be based
on popular consent.
● Being elected would embolden the second chamber and result in more effective scrutiny of
government legislation.
○ The House of Lords’ unelected nature limits its ability to scrutinise legislation, whilst
many members of the House of Lords also fail to turn up regularly or play an active,
professional role.
● If a new chamber was elected through proportional representation, it likely wouldn’t have a
majority and would therefore be able to effectively challenge the dominance of the House of
Commons and change the current system from being an ‘elective dictatorship’.
● If elected through proportional representation, a new second chamber would be much more
representative of the electorate, especially in comparison to the House of Lords which is
very unrepresentative in terms of demographics and the House of Commons which is
unrepresentative due to First Past The Post.
Arguments Against The House Of Lords Being Replaced With An Elected Second Chamber:
● If the second chamber was elected, it would be able to claim democratic legitimacy and be
a lot more assertive. This would risk causing gridlock in Parliament and prevent important
legislation from being passed.
○ This would be especially likely if it was elected at a different time to the House of
Commons and if it was elected using proportional representation.
● The current appointed nature of the House of Lords can be seen as an advantage, as life
peers have a lot of expertise in different areas and can therefore provide effective scrutiny.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 5
○ Current problems with appointments by ex Prime Ministers could also be fixed
without resorting to an elected chamber.
● The current balance of the two chambers can be seen as working, with the House of Lords
being a less powerful revising chamber that can hold the government to account on key
issues using its delaying power when it needs to.
● An elected second chamber would likely be more concerned with party politics than
anything else, even if it was intended to represent different regions.
○ This can be seen in Australia and America.
The House of Lords (Hereditary Peers) Bill:
● Labour’s 2024 manifesto set out an ambitious plan to reform the House of Lords, including
the complete abolition of hereditary peers, the introduction of a mandatory retirement age of
80, and a public consultation on replacing the Lords with a more representative and/or
elected second chamber.
● Since taking office, the Labour government hasn’t yet introduced any legislation on the
mandatory retirement age and hasn’t set up a public consultation, but it has introduced the
House of Lords (Hereditary Peers) Bill, which seeks to remove the remaining 92 hereditary
peers who retain their seats in the Lords.
○ Labour argues that this reform is necessary to modernise the Lords, making it more
accountable and professional, and to end what they describe as an “anachronism”
in British politics that gives the aristocracy a role in legislation.
● Conservative peers have been actively working to obstruct the bill’s passage by tabling
large numbers of amendments and arguing that removing hereditary peers would reduce
independent expertise in the Lords.
○ Despite these efforts, the bill is expected to pass due to the Salisbury Convention,
which dictates that the Lords should not block or unduly delay policies that were
explicitly included in the winning party’s election manifesto.
○ As Labour secured a large majority in the 2024 election with a clear pledge to
abolish hereditary peers, the Lords will ultimately be bound by constitutional
convention to allow the reform to go through, even if some peers continue to resist
its implementation.
📜Human Rights Act 1998 📜
● For more detail on this, look at the Rights In Context video on the Politics Explained
YouTube Channel and the accompanying section of the UK Politics Updated Textbook on
the Politics Explained website.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 6
What Reforms Were Introduced?
● The Human Rights Act 1998 enshrined the European Convention on Human Rights into UK
law, in effect from 2000, meaning that the rights could be defended in UK courts rather than
having to go to Strasbourg.
○ The rights protected by the Act included the right to life, right to a fair trial, right to
privacy and a family life, prohibition of torture.
✅In What Ways Were These Reforms Positive and Significant? ✅
● Since the HRA, it is often claimed that the UK has developed a 'rights-based culture' as all
new legislation must be compliant with the act and judges can declare earlier acts of
parliament incompatible with it (though they can't legally compel parliament to make
changes due to the concept of parliamentary sovereignty).
○ Parliament usually acts to address any issues raised by the courts and parliament
also has a Joint Committee on Human Rights to scrutinise bills and ensure they are
compatible, demonstrating the 'persuasive influence' of the HRA.
○ For example, in A v Secretary of State for the Home Department, part of The
Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 was declared incompatible with Articles
5 and 14 of the human rights act by permitting the detention of suspected
international terrorists in a way that discriminated on the grounds of nationality or
immigration status.
■ The Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005 was passed by Parliament to amend
the legislation as a result.
● The Human Rights Act can therefore be seen as limiting Parliamentary Sovereignty and
furthering the Rule of Law in the UK.
❌ In What Ways Were These Reforms Limited? ❌
● The Human Rights Act has been criticised for giving unelected judges too much power.
● The HRA may be used to check other laws, but it is not entrenched and could still be
repealed by a simple act of parliament, whilst also not being binding on parliament.
○ The Illegal Migration Bill, for example, was introduced by Home Secretary Suella
Braverman on 7th March 2023 with a section 19 note stating that there was a
likelihood the provisions of the bill would be incompatible with the Human Rights Act
and international law (The European Convention on Human Rights), but that the
government wanted to proceed with it nonetheless.
■ A similar note was included when the government introduced the Safety of
Rwanda Bill.
○ This does ensure that Parliamentary Sovereignty is protected, however.
● Many critics on the right say the HRA stops terror suspects from being deported and that
the HRA therefore favours undeserving individuals rather than protecting the legitimate
freedoms of UK citizens and protecting society as a whole.
Potential Further Reforms
● At various points, the Conservative Party has backed pulling out of the European
Convention on Human Rights and replacing the Human Rights Act with a British Bill of
Rights, which has been criticised by hundreds of human rights groups for seeking to
remove rights in the UK.
○ The proposed Bill of Rights would make it easier to deport foreign criminals by
elevating public safety over the right to family life. It would also increase freedom of
the press by elevating the right to freedom of expression over the right to privacy.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 7
○ Former Justice Secretary Dominic Raab argued that the HRA has led to lots of
unjustifiably successful human rights claims in court, especially in relation to the
deportation of foreign criminals and immigrants.
● This British Bill Of Rights would make the UK Supreme Court the final court of appeal,
rather than the European Court of Human Rights.
○ It would also weaken the protection of rights in the UK, as the British Bill of Rights
would be a simple Act of Parliament, whilst the European Convention of Human
Rights is an international treaty.
Calls From The Conservative Party To Leave The ECHR:
● During the 2024 Conservative Party leadership election, Robert Jenrick advocated for the
UK’s withdrawal from the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), arguing that it
was necessary to address illegal immigration and bolster national security.
○ He argued that the ECHR’s jurisdiction impeded the UK’s ability to deport individuals
with criminal records and manage its borders, whilst departing from the ECHR
would restore parliamentary sovereignty and enable the UK to implement
immigration policies without external interference.
● Since assuming leadership, Kemi Badenoch has not dismissed the possibility of leaving the
ECHR. She has expressed concerns that international bodies, including the ECHR, have
overstepped their original mandates and undermine UK sovereignty.
○ Badenoch has indicated that if these institutions do not undergo necessary reforms,
the UK should consider disengaging from them.
● Leaving the ECHR (and by impliction removing the Human Rights Act) would not only
significantly reduce the protection of individual rights in the UK, it would also be a significant
change to the UK Constitution.
○ The ECHR and its copying into UK law as the Human Rights Act has been the basis
of rights protection in the UK Constitution for decades.
🗳 Electoral Reform 🗳
● For more detail on this, look at the Electoral Systems video on the Politics Explained
YouTube Channel and the accompanying section of the UK Politics Updated Textbook on
the Politics Explained website.
What Reforms Were Introduced?
● The introduction of devolved assemblies also led to the introduction of various proportional
representation systems in Scotland, Wales, London and Northern Ireland.
○ The Additional Member System was introduced for the Welsh Assembly and
Scottish Parliament.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 8
○ The Single Transferable Vote System was introduced for the Northern Ireland
Assembly.
○ The Supplementary Vote system was introduced for London Mayoral Elections.
● In 1999, New Labour also introduced a version of the party list system with multi-member
constituencies for elections to the European Parliament.
✅In What Ways Were These Reforms Positive and Significant? ✅
● Where these more proportional systems were introduced, they resulted in more
proportional election results and fairer representation for small parties in particular.
○ New Labour’s electoral reform therefore improved democracy in the UK.
● This electoral reform can be seen as a recognition that First Past The Post is a flawed
system.
❌ In What Ways Were These Reforms Limited? ❌
● Though Blair had briefly considered it before the 1997 election, the FPTP electoral system
for UK Parliament elections wasn’t changed.
○ Democracy therefore continues to be limited for the most important UK elections.
● This was in large part because Labour had great success under FPTP in the 1997, 2001
and 2005 elections. They were resistant to changing a system that had granted them
significant majorities.
Potential Further Reforms
Arguments For A More Proportional System Being Introduced For UK Parliament Elections:
● More proportional systems have been shown to be effective in Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland.
○ Especially in Scotland and Wales where minority/coalition governments have been
largely stable.
● A more proportional electoral system would improve democracy in the UK by:
○ Improving voter choice.
○ Being far more proportional and representative, particularly by improving the
representation of minor parties and limiting the dominance of the two main parties.
Arguments Against A More Proportional System Being Introduced For UK Parliament
Elections:
● A more proportional electoral system (the Alternative Vote System) was rejected in a 2011
referendum.
● The MP-Constituency link is strong under FPTP.
● FPTP excludes extremist parties.
● FPTP is easy to use and delivers quick results.
● Under FPTP, strong majority governments which can effectively pass laws are usually
elected. This is much less common under more proportional systems, which often lead to
much less stable governments.
How Likely Is Further Electoral Reform:
● Further electoral reform, particularly replacing the FPTP electoral system in use for UK
Parliament elections, is very unlikely.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 9
● The Conservative Party strongly supports FPTP, whilst the Labour Party supports FPTP
also (despite some parts of the party supporting proportional representation) and is very
unlikely to replace FPTP, after it got them into government in 2024 with a huge majority.
Devolution
● For more detail on this, look at the Devolution video on the Politics Explained YouTube
Channel and the accompanying section of the UK Government Updated Textbook on the
Politics Explained website.
What Reforms Were Introduced?
● Following referendums, in 1997-98, devolved bodies were introduced in Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland. The Greater London Authority was also introduced in 1999.
Scotland:
● Scotland was given the most powers out of all of the devolved bodies, due to Scotland’s
strong nationalist movement.
○ Including control over most public services; health, education, justice, agriculture
and most transport. Can therefore be seen as ‘service devolution’. The powers
reserved for Westminster were listed (including defence, macroeconomic policy,
foreign policy, constitutional matter etc.), with the left reserved for Scotland.
● Scotland has since gained even more powers, including significant fiscal and constitutional
powers.
Wales:
● Wales started with far fewer powers than Scotland or Northern Ireland, as there was little
nationalist sentiment in Wales and the 1997 referendum on Welsh devolution was very
close; a majority of 50.5% on a 50% turnout.
○ At first, Wales only had the Welsh Assembly that had no legislative powers or 1st
minister. It was only granted administrative devolution.
● Over the years, Wales has gained more powers in response to growing nationalism and
public support for devolution, though, and it now has key primary legislative powers and
can be seen as having ‘service devolution’.
Northern Ireland:
● Devolution to Northern Ireland was introduced in 1998 as part of a broader peace process
between Catholics and Protestants (nationalists and unionists) following the 1998 Good
Friday Agreement.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 10
○ Power sharing is key to the Northern Ireland Assembly. The executive must be led
by a First Minister and Deputy First Minister and several key decisions, including the
budget and programme for government, require cross-community support.
○ In 1998, Northern Ireland was (like Scotland) given primary legislative control over
areas not reserved for Westminster. Apart from corporation tax and policing and
justice being devolved, the Northern Irish Assembly has gained few power since
and still lacks major tax raising powers.
Greater London Authority:
● The Greater London Authority was introduced, controlled by a directly elected mayor and
elected London Assembly.
○ The Greater London Authority has strategic responsibility and power over policing,
transport and economic development.
✅In What Ways Were These Reforms Positive and Significant? ✅
● Devolution improved democracy in the UK by creating governments closer to the people of
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
● Devolution reduced the sovereignty of the UK Parliament by giving significant power to
other legislative bodies.
● Devolution in Northern Ireland restored peace following the Troubles.
● Devolution can be seen as helping to keep the UK together.
❌ In What Ways Were These Reforms Limited? ❌
● At first, Wales received limited legislative powers.
● Devolution has arguably increased tensions between different parts of the UK and failed to
stop a growing independence movement in Scotland.
● Devolution was asymmetric, with there being no English Parliament or substantial
representation of England, therefore creating a democratic deficit.
Potential Further Reforms
Scotland:
● There are few further powers that can be devolved to the Scottish Parliament as it already
holds a great amount of power.
● There are some, though, and ‘devomax’ could be introduced to prevent growing calls for
independence.
○ Many polls suggest that if there was an IndyRef2, then the Scottish public would
vote for independence.
● The more powers that are devolved to Scotland, the more pertinent the West Lothian
question becomes, though.
Wales:
● Welsh independence is growing in popularity, with some polls over 30% support. This may
lead to greater devolution in Wales, with calls for Wales to have the same powers as
Scotland
● This may also have been influenced by the COVID period, in which Wales demonstrated it
could diverge from England on issues, often successfully.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 11
Northern Ireland:
● Further devolution is unlikely as unionists are very opposed.
● A referendum on reunification with the Republic of Ireland is possible, though, especially as
it is estimated that Catholics now outnumber Protestants in Northern Ireland.
England:
● Further devolution could be introduced in England to change the asymmetric nature of
devolution, solve the West Lothian Question, increase the representation of England and
give an outlet to English Nationalism.
● There are two key possible reforms.
○ An English Parliament could be introduced.
○ More regional devolution, for example more city regions or regional assemblies,
could be introduced in England and these could be given more powers.
■ After new devolved bodies were introduced in 2024, devolved bodies
including combined authorities and directly elected metro mayors now cover
64% of the English population and over 90% of the population in the North.
󰳌 The Supreme Court 󰳌
● For more detail on this, look at the Supreme Court video on the Politics Explained YouTube
Channel and the accompanying section of the UK Government Updated Textbook on the
Politics Explained website.
What Reforms Were Introduced?
● Blair’s government introduced the Supreme Court with the Constitutional Reform Act 2005.
● The creation of the court was designed to end the fusion of powers at the highest level of
the UK judiciary and modernise by moving towards a separation of powers that would
increase the highest court’s judicial independence and make it clearly separate from
Parliament.
○ Previously the most senior judges had sat as members of the House of Lords and
were known as the ‘law lords’.
● The Constitutional Reform Act also reduced the powers of the Lord Chancellor.
○ Prior to the 2005 Constitutional Reform Act, the Lord Chancellor had 3 roles:
■ 1. Cabinet minister in the government who oversaw the legal system
(executive).
■ 2. Chairman of sittings in the House of Lords (legislative).
■ 3. Head of the judiciary who appointed other judges (judicial).
○ This was criticised for lacking independence, especially the fact that a government
minister appointed senior judges.
○ As a result, the Constitutional Reform Act removed the legislative and judicial role of
the Lord Chancellor, who is now just a government minister.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 12
✅In What Ways Were These Reforms Positive and Significant? ✅
● The introduction of the Supreme Court brought the UK in line with most of Europe by clearly
separating the legislature and the judiciary.
○ This increased the independence of the country’s highest court and made it more
effective in holding the government and parliament to account.
○ It can therefore be seen as improving the rule of law.
● The downgrading of the role of Lord Chancellor also increased judicial independence and
neutrality.
❌ In What Ways Were These Reforms Limited? ❌
● The Supreme Court still lacked the power to strike down laws passed by Parliament, whilst
the Supreme Court could in theory and legally still be abolished/reformed with a simple act
of parliament.
○ Parliamentary Sovereignty is therefore still intact.
Potential Further Reforms
● Though the Supreme Court has become increasingly politicised of late, especially in
relation to key Brexit cases, it seems unlikely there will be any major reforms to the court in
the near future.
● If a codified and entrenched constitution were introduced in the future, then the Supreme
Court could gain the power to strike down laws passed by Parliament.
Other Minor Constitutional Changes Introduced By New Labour
The Freedom Of Information Act 2000
● The Freedom Of Information Act was introduced to make it easier for opposition MPs,
journalists, voters and others to request information from the government.
○ Members of the public also gained the right to access any information held about
them by public bodies. It can therefore be seen as improving the rights of citizens.
● The Freedom of Information Act has been praised for making the government more
transparent and enabling journalists to seek out sensitive information and hold the
government to account.
○ The MPs’ Expenses Scandal, for example, was discovered through Freedom of
Information Requests.
● On the other hand, the Freedom of Information Act can be seen as too weak, as the
government can turn down some requests if they judge they would negatively affect the
workings of the current government.
○ Further, it has been criticised for making it more difficult for politicians to discuss
controversial matters through formal channels, which leads to them being discussed
informally, especially over Whatsapp, or not at all.
■ Tony Blair has since said he regrets passing the Freedom of Information Act
for this reason.
Minor Reforms To The House Of Commons
● Though there was little attempt to reform the House of Commons and strengthen its ability
to hold the government to account, New Labour did introduce some minor changes to the
House of Commons.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 13
○ Efforts were made to make the House of Commons more family friendly, including
by greatly reducing the number of late night sittings.
○ Since 2002, New Labour also mandated the Prime Minister to be questioned by the
House of Commons Liaison Select Committee twice a year.
📜 The Coalition’s Constitutional Reforms 📜
An Introduction To The Coalition’s Constitutional Reforms
🔵 How The Conservative Party Has Traditionally Been Opposed To Constitutional
Reform 🔵
● The Conservative Party has traditionally opposed reform to the constitution, as they prefer
to let change happen gradually and in response to circumstances rather than through
design.
● They support the uncodified constitution, which has allowed change to happen naturally,
and fear that any major changes to the constitution will disrupt the functioning of the
political system.
🟡 How The Liberal Democrats Supported Constitutional Reform 🟡
● Radical constitutional reform has always been one of the key policies of the Liberal
Democrats.
○ They support improving the functioning and democracy of the political system by
changing the voting system, removing undemocratic elements like the House of
Lords and constraining the power of the executive.
● The implementation of proposals for constitutional reform were one of the key conditions for
the Liberal Democrats joining the coalition with the Conservatives.
○ After the 2010 expenses scandal, there was a heightened anti-politics mood in the
country and, as a consequence, Clegg tried to package his reforms as a great
modernisation of the political system.
○ He argued that “incremental change will not do…'it is time for a wholesale, big bang
approach to political reform.”
An Overview Of Constitutional Reform Under The Coalition
The Constitutional Reforms Passed By The Coalition
● The Fixed-term Parliament Act.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 14
● The coalition implemented the recommendations of the Wright Committee which gave more
power to backbenchers.
○ MPs now vote for the chairs of Select Committees rather than them being chosen
by the whips and the Backbench Business Committee was set up so that more time
was spent debating issues chosen by backbenchers.
○ The public was given power to put subjects on the agenda through e-petitions, with
100,000 signatures required for a debate if an MP backs it.
● The Conservative backed 2011 EU Act enshrined into law the principle that any new
treaties transferring power to the EU should be subject to a referendum.
● The coalition introduced legislation altering the line of succession to the crown so that
gender no longer played any role.
● In 2012, 10 cities held referendums on whether to have a mayor, whilst the coalition also
accepted devolution and independence referendums in Wales and Scotland respectively.
The Constitutional Reforms That Were Blocked/Abandoned By The Coalition
● One of the Lib Dems’ key conditions. for joining the coalition was the holding of the
Alternative Vote Referendum in 2011. Cameron managed to get the legislation for it passed
but the Conservatives led a successful campaign against AV and it was conclusively
rejected by the electorate.
○ This ended the 'honeymoon period' between the two parties and effectively ended
the prospects of further electoral reform for a decade or so.
● The coalition introduced a bill to replace the House of Lords with an 80% elected Senate
with 300-400 members and 15-year-terms. But this was blocked in 2012 when Tory rebels
sided with Labour.
● The Conservatives had sought to introduce legislation reducing the number of MPs from
650 to 600 and equalising the size of constituencies, but the Liberal Democrats withdrew
their support, in large part because the boundary changes would have benefitted the Tories
and harmed the Lib Dems.
● The coalition set up commissions on reforming the Human Rights Act and dealing with the
West Lothian question.
○ However, neither process resulted in change as the two parties disagreed.
The Fixed Term Parliaments Act 2011
● The Fixed Term Parliament Act removed the prerogative power of the Prime Minister to call
a snap election when it suited them, by requiring ⅔ of Parliament to support a snap election
before it was called.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 15
○ It was designed to reassure the Liberal Democrats that Cameron wouldn't call a
snap election when it suited the Conservative Party and therefore distract him from
governing effectively.
○ It performed its role during the coalition government, which lasted the whole 5
years.
● After the coalition, the legislation was largely ineffective, however, as shown in the 2017
and 2019 election, when the governments were able to shame the opposition into voting for
an election, which they are unlikely to block as it would make them seem very weak.
● The Fixed Term Parliaments Act was repealed by Boris Johnson’s government in 2022.
󰧻 Further Devolution To Wales 󰧻
● Following a 2011 referendum in which 64% voted in favour, Wales gained primary
legislative control over devolved areas, similar to what Scotland was originally given.
○ This therefore brought Wales in line with the Welsh and Northern Irish devolved
bodies.
● Following the referendum, the coalition government set up the Silk Commission to consider
even further devolution, leading to the 2014 Government of Wales Act which renamed the
Welsh executive the Welsh government and also gave it control over landfill tax & stamp
duty, alongside the substantial control it already had over health, education, transport etc.
Reforms Undertaken Since 2015
󰧺 Further Devolution To Scotland 󰧺
● In the run up to and since the 2014 Scottish Independence Referendum, Scotland has
gained more powers in order to try and satisfy calls for more autonomy and disincentivise
independence.
● This was in particular in the Scotland Act 2016, which gave the Scottish Parliament further
powers, particularly in the area of tax raising.
○ Scotland gained control over 50% of VAT, the power to set all bands and rates of
income tax, key welfare benefits and control over the franchise, which they used to
reduce the voting age to 16.
● This can be seen as fiscal devolution and brought Scotland close to ‘devomax’, whilst
further reducing the sovereignty of the UK Parliament and increasing the strength of the
West Lothian Question.
Brexit
● Perhaps the most significant constitutional change undertaken since 2015 is Brexit.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 16
● Following the EU referendum in 2016, Britain finally left the European Union in 2020,
leading to Parliament regaining substantial sovereignty it had ceded to the EU.
English Votes For English Laws
● Power being devolved to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland raised the West Lothian
Question.
○ This questioned why Scottish MPs should be able to vote on English matters in the
UK Parliament that don’t affect their constituents, when English MPs can’t do the
same in the Scottish Parliament.
● In order to seek to tackle this, EVEL was introduced by the Conservative Government in
2015. This allowed English MPs to veto any legislation affecting England only from being
passed. It didn’t, however, allow English MPs to make their own laws.
● It wasn’t used often (only for around ⅓ of bills in the 2015-17 parliament). It may have
become more significant if a government was elected with a majority in the UK but not in
England.
● It was criticised for creating two tiers of MPs, adding unnecessary complications and not
providing a viable expression for English identity and was scrapped by Boris Johnson’s
government in July 2021.
The Recall Of MPs Act 2015
● The Recall Of MPs Act 2015 was introduced in response to the fact that voters had no legal
means between elections of removing scandalous MPs who refused to resign their seats.
● It means that if an MP is sentenced to a custodial sentence or is suspended from the
Commons for more than 21 days, a by-election is triggered if at least 10% of constituents
sign a recall petition.
● In October 2019, for example, there was a Brecon and Radnorshire by-election after
Christopher Davies provided misleading expenses claims.
● This is an example of direct democracy which increased the sovereignty of the people.
Rishi Sunak’s Use Of A Section 35 Order
● In January 2023, Rishi Sunak used a Section 35 Order to block Scotland’s proposed
gender reform bill, which would’ve introduced self-identification for those who wanted to
change gender and allowed 16 and 17 year olds to do so.
○ Section 35 of the Scotland Act allows the UK Government to block a bill from a
devolved body in exceptional circumstances if it believes it will have an adverse
impact on UK-wide law.
● This was the first time a Section 35 order had been used and it can be seen as somewhat
reaffirming the sovereignty of the UK Parliament.
Further English Devolution
● Following new devolved bodies introduced in 2024, devolved bodies including combined
authorities and directly elected metro mayors now cover 64% of the English population and
over 90% of the population in the North.
○ None of these devolved bodies have primary legislative control like in Scotland,
Wales or Northern Ireland, but they do have significant administrative control and,
increasingly, also financial autonomy, with a specific focus on transport and regional
economic growth.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 17
Trailblazer Devolution Deals To Greater Manchester:
● In March 2023, the UK government introduced two Trailblazer Devolution Deals for Greater
Manchester and the West Midlands. These deals didn’t grant legislative control, but did give
the regions substantial administrative control and funding autonomy over important areas of
policy.
○ They devolved control over post-19 skills education, affordable housing programs,
and infrastructure investment, therefore giving the authorities significant control over
regional economic development.
● This built on the existing control both areas had over transport and the influence Greater
Manchester has in health and social care, setting a precedent for future "Level 4"
devolution; English regions that can have significant administrative control.
2023 Autumn Statement Introduces 4 New Devolution Settlements Including North
East:
● The 2023 Autumn Statement expanded English devolution by introducing new devolved
bodies for the North East, Greater Lincolnshire, Hull and East Yorkshire, and Lancashire.
● The North East was particularly significant because it aligned its powers with Greater
Manchester (‘level 4’ devolution) by gaining control over areas including transportation,
economic development, skills funding, and affordable housing.
○ The devolved area therefore has significant control. It became operational in May
2024 after Labour candidate Kim McGuinness, its first mayor, was elected.
○ This is the same devolved area that was rejected in a 2004 election, with a 78% no
vote.
● This further devolution demonstrates the commitment of the Conservative Party to
devolving power in England.
📜 The Codification And Entrenchment Of The Constitution 📜
What Do ‘Codification’ And ‘Entrenchment’ Mean?
● The UK Constitution is uncodified and unentrenched, meaning that it isn’t written down in a
single document and can be changed with a simple Act of Parliament, rather than being
protected to a greater extent.
● As a result, one of the key debates in relation to constitutional change is whether the UK
constitution should be codified in a single document and entrenched so that it couldn’t be
easily changed, including a British Bill of Rights.
Developments In Relation To Codification
How Was The Coalition Prepared For And How Can It Be Used As Evidence For The
Advocates And Opponents Of Codification?
● Civil servants put together a Cabinet Manual detailing the procedures for a coalition and it
was agreed that Gordon Brown should be caretaker until a government was formed.
○ Collective responsibility among cabinet ministers was adapted as was government
decision making.
● Preparations for a possible hung parliament and the drafting of the Cabinet Manual can be
seen as a step towards a codified constitution.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 18
● On the other hand, the ability of the uncodified constitution to cope with a coalition and
hung parliament can be used as evidence of its robustness and flexibility.
✅ Arguments For The Codification Of The Constitution ✅
Parliament And The Supreme Court Would Be Better Able To Check The Executive
● Codification could enable parliament to better check and constrain the executive, making
the government more responsive and accountable to the people's representatives.
○ It would therefore provide a clearer separation of powers.
● For example, the House of Lords could become elected and therefore be given greater
powers, or parliament could have a veto on certain key decisions such as the appointment
of ministers.
○ This would not only constrain the executive, but also reform an undemocratic,
outdated aspect of the constitution.
● The Supreme Court could also strike down laws if they infringed upon the constitution.
● That said, such changes could be made without codification.
Codification Would Encourage Public Engagement In Politics
● Codified constitutions help citizens to hold the government accountable by spelling out
clearly what roles and powers each branch has and what rights and duties citizens have.
○ Voters are therefore able to judge how well different institutions or individual
politicians have performed.
● Codification could therefore help to engage more citizens in the political process and
increase participation.
● It can be argued a Bill of Rights would also give citizens a greater understanding and
attachment to their rights as citizens.
● A codified constitution would also bring Britain into line with other western democracies.
The Current Constitution Is Too Easy To Amend
● The British constitution is arguably too easy to amend as any statute can be repealed by
parliament, whatever its constitutional implications.
● For example, the Fixed Term Parliament Act was arguably passed for short term political
reasons in relation to the coalition, but could’ve had far reaching implications, preventing a
government with no majority from triggering an election.
● Entrenchment would protect the constitution from political interference from an overarching
executive and make it more likely that potential reforms are fully debated before being
enacted.
Codification Would Effectively Protect Rights
● Codified constitutions protect key rights, as they are entrenched and can only be changed
or curtailed with widespread popular and political support.
● This prevents hasty and heavy-handed action that might seem desirable in a crisis, but
would in practice undermine essential rights and freedoms.
○ Such an argument could be made about COVID-19 lockdowns or Blair’s
counter-terrorism measures.
● It would also prevent a government overturning the Human Rights Act and removing rights,
as the Conservative Party has often threatened to do.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 19
The Neutrality Of The Judiciary
● Judges are neutral and arguably best placed to interpret the constitution and make sure
that it is applied fairly by public bodies, including parliament.
How Can Recent Events Be Used As Arguments For A Codified Constitution?
● It arguably shouldn't have been so easy to change a fundamental part of the constitution
(EU membership) on the basis of an advisory referendum whose support commanded the
support of less than 50% of the franchise.
● Further, the constitutional requirements were so unclear that the government had to be
taken to the Supreme Court to prevent it from unilaterally triggering Article 50.
● The division of powers is very unclear in Britain, whilst Brexit has shown power to be very
centralised, with the devolved bodies having little say in Brexit, despite it having a serious
impact on their future.
● Fundamental constitutional provisions could be protected by requiring supermajorities in
parliament rather than through judicial review.
● It is uncertain if the government can authorise armed combat without parliament's approval.
❌ Arguments Against The Codification Of The Constitution ❌
The UK’s Uncodified Constitution Makes It Flexible
● The flexibility of Britain's uncodified constitution has allowed the British system to evolve
gradually and adapt to unusual circumstances when necessary.
● The constitution has evolved a great deal over the past two centuries, making Britain a
democratic system, and New Labour's programme demonstrates that major changes can
be made.
● Further, many of the reforms advocates of a codified constitution support, such as an
elected House of Lords, could be introduced without codification.
The UK’s Uncodified Constitution Is Able To Deal With Emergencies
● The uncodified nature of the constitution has allowed governments to deal with
emergencies, such as suspending elections during the wars, and deal with changed
circumstances, such as security measures post-9/11, therefore allowing the system to
develop in a way that suits Britain and can be better kept up to date.
○ The emergency measures brought in to respond to COVID-19, which significantly
impinged upon human rights, are a good example of this.
● For example, to prepare for the 2010 coalition government, the Cabinet Manual adapted
conventions such as collective responsibility and the Fixed Term Parliaments Act was
introduced.
The UK’s Uncodified Constitution Produces Strong Governments That Can
Effectively Pass Laws
● Britain's constitution typically provides for strong governments that can carry out their
legislative programme without facing the same level of checks and balances as in many
codified systems.
● British voters can be confident that governments elected with a good majority can
implement their manifesto pledges, unlike in countries such as the US, where it is very
difficult to pass legislation in important areas, such as climate change.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 20
● Further, one could argue that weaker governments with smaller majorities and lower levels
of public support face greater checks and balances.
Conventions Are An Effective Part Of The UK’s Uncodified Constitution
● Though not entrenched, the conventions and traditions established by the UK constitution
are widely revered and therefore hard to ignore or change.
● When changes do happen, such as the creation of Select Committees, they tend to have
broad support.
● Further, conventions are arguably stronger than supporters of an uncodified constitution
argue.
○ This can be seen in the 2020 Prorogation Of Parliament case, where the Supreme
Court upheld the convention that prorogations shouldn’t be used by the government
for political purposes.
● Capturing all of these conventions and traditions in a written document may be difficult and
some aspects of the constitutional framework could therefore be lost if the UK constitution
was codified.
Codification Would Increase The Power Of Judges
● A codified constitution would increase the power of unelected, unaccountable and
unrepresentative judges to police the constitution and make difficult decisions about how it
should be applied, dragging them into political matters and granting them too much political
power
● It is arguably better if Parliament resolves such issues and is accountable to the people, as
is currently the case.
The Human Rights Act Functions Effectively
● Though the Human Rights Act doesn't bind parliament, it works hard to ensure that new
bills comply with it and it is likely to act on any finding of incompatibility. Government
departments act in a similar way.
● Therefore, it is arguable that the Human Rights Act has in fact provided a robust framework
for protecting the rights of British citizens.
Codifying The Constitution Would Be A Complex Process
● Codification would likely be a highly complex and controversial process that could take
years and distract politicians from governing the country.
● Further, there would likely be significant disagreement over how the constitution should
look, whilst there is little public pressure for codification anyway.
How Can Recent Events Be Used As Arguments Against A Codified Constitution?
● Brexit arguably showed how power is dispersed in Britain, with the Supreme Court,
government and parliament all being involved in the triggering of Article 50.
○ The division of powers in the UK is normally very clear and that Article 50 decision
strengthened this division of powers.
○ Clarifying the answers to questions/uncertainties on issues such as referendums
doesn't require the codification of the constitution, just legislation.
● There is a delicate balance in the constitution between law and politics; codifying the
constitution would upset that balance in favour of the unelected, which isn't in the
democratic interest.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 21
● Brexit is mainly a question for Westminster and not the devolved bodies not because the
UK is overly centralised, but because the UK's international relations are reserved to
Westminster, just as they would be under any federal constitution.
● Codified constitutions freeze the balance of political power according to the prejudices of a
particular moment, whereas the unwritten British constitution continues to adapt to the
changing needs of the nation.
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A
Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 22
