https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover
UK Government
4 Prime Minister and Executive
● 3.1 The structure, role, and powers of the Executive.
○ Its structure, including Prime Minister, the Cabinet, junior ministers and
government departments.
○ Its main roles, including proposing legislation, proposing a budget, and
making policy decisions within laws and budget.
○ The main powers of the Executive, including Royal Prerogative powers,
initiation of legislation and secondary legislative power
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓
🗣 Key Debates 🗣
● Though it is unlikely you will get asked a question just on this content, knowing the content
in this lesson is crucial to being able to understand and answer questions on the rest of the
content in the Prime Minister and the executive topic.
○ It is useful for the below questions and it is also possible that the question in bold
could be asked that largely focuses on this topic.
❓Past/Possible Essay Questions❓
● Evaluate the view that Prime Ministers are free to follow the policies they want. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the cabinet can act as an effective check on prime ministerial power.
(30)
● Evaluate the view that the roles and powers of the executive allow it to dominate
Parliament. (30)
● Evaluate the view that prime ministers have become more presidential in recent years. (30)
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 1
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover 1
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓ 1
The Structure Of The Executive 2
The Prime Minister 2
Government Departments 3
The Cabinet 3
The Main Roles Of The Executive 4
Proposing Legislation 4
Proposing A Budget and Making Decisions About Fiscal Policy 5
Making Policy Decisions 6
The Main Powers Of The Executive 7
Royal Prerogative Powers 7
📜 Control Over The Legislative Agenda 📜 9
Secondary Legislative Powers 10
The Structure Of The Executive
The Prime Minister
● The Prime Minister is the head of the executive (government) and manages its agenda,
personnel and structure.
○ They have the power of patronage and therefore control the appointment/firing of all
ministers, including cabinet ministers and junior ministers.
■ Prime Ministers frequently reshuffle their cabinet in order to maintain their
authority.
■ They also use government whips to keep the party in line.
○ They chair and set the agenda of Cabinet meetings, whilst also deciding which
ministers sit on cabinet committees.
■ These are smaller committees that make decisions on important areas and
can make collective decisions that bind the whole of government.
● Such as the National Security Council and the Home Affairs
Committee.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 2
○ They also organise the structure of government and can create, abolish or merge
departments.
■ In June 2020, for example, Boris Johnson merged the Department For
International Aid (DFID) and the Foreign Office (FCO).
Government Departments
● The government is formed of departments, each of which is responsible for an area of
policy. There are currently 24 ministerial departments.
○ These include the Treasury, Department For Transport and Department For Health
and Social Care.
● Each department is headed by a cabinet minister and supported by a team of junior
ministers, all of whom are MPs or peers and are responsible for specific aspects of work
within the department.
○ The current Home Office department, for example, is headed by Yvette Coopr who
is the Secretary of State for the Home Department.
■ There are then 3 Ministers of State who have specific responsibilities.
● Diana Johnson is the Minister of State for Crime, Policing and Fire.
● Dan Jarvis is the Minister for Security.
● Angela Eagle is the Minister for Border Security and Asylum.
■ Lord Hanson of Flint is also a Minister of State as the Lords Minister.
■ There are then 2 more junior ministers who rank below the Ministers of State
and are known as the Parliamentary Under Secretary Of State.
● Jess Phillips is the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State (Minister
for Safeguarding and Violence Against Women and Girls).
● Seema Malhotra is the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State
(Minister for Migration and Citizenship).
● Departments also oversee Executive Agencies which are semi-independent bodies run by
civil servants, for example the Department for Transport oversees the DVLA (Driver &
Vehicle Licensing Agency)
○ There are currently 422 executive agencies.
The Cabinet
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 3
The Structure Of The Cabinet
● The Cabinet consists of around 20 senior ministers who head the departments, including
those who hold the title Secretary of State. There are currently 22, including PM Starmer.
● Several other senior figures aren't members of the cabinet but do attend meetings, such as
the Chief Whip and Leader of the House, as well as some important junior ministers.
○ For example, Darren Jones (Chief Secretary to the Treasury) and Lord Hermer KC
(Attorney General) attend under Starmer.
● The Cabinet can be used for discussion and collective decision making on important areas
of policy, though many decisions are taken in smaller cabinet committees, such as
Economic Affairs and the National Security Council.
○ Meetings are fairly formal and headed by the Prime Minister. The agenda is set in
advance by the Prime Minister, with items introduced by the relevant departmental
minister.
○ Cabinet ministers, and the whole government, accept collective responsibility for all
decisions made by the government, which means they must either agree to defend
them in public even if they disagree with them privately, or resign.
● The Cabinet Office provides administrative support and is headed by the cabinet secretary,
the most senior civil servant in the UK.
○ The current cabinet secretary is Chris Wormald.
The Key Roles And Functions Of The Cabinet
● To register and ratify decisions made elsewhere.
● To discuss and make decisions on major issues.
● To receive reports on key developments.
● To settle disputes between departments.
The Main Roles Of The Executive
Proposing Legislation
● The executive devises and initiates legislation. The government controls most of the
parliamentary timetable and proposes most primary legislation.
● A lot of government bills put into effect policies proposed in their manifestos, though the
government will also introduce other measures.
○ The Illegal Migration Bill, for example, wasn’t in the Conservative Party’s 2019
manifesto, nor was the Safety of Rwanda Act, passed in April 2024.
● The King’s speech is used at the beginning of a parliamentary session to outline the areas
the government intends to legislate on and the key bills they intend to introduce.
○ The most recent King’s speech by Starmer in July 2024 included the Great British
Energy Bill, Employment Rights Bill and the House of Lords (Hereditary Peers) Bill.
● The executive also has law-making powers on secondary legislation, whereby it can make
changes to the implementation of existing laws within limits set by the original legislation, by
passing ‘statutory instruments’. These can be used to introduce some government policies.
○ For example, statutory instruments are used to ban new substances by adding them
to a list under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.
○ The majority of statutory instruments are made law by ministers and automatically
become laws unless objected to by Parliament, which is very rare.
Early Prisoners Release as an Example of Secondary Legislation:
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 4
● On the 12th of July 2024, the new Labour government approved a Statutory Instrument (a
form of secondary legislation) to deal with the prisons crisis by allowing the early release of
prisoners.
○ This meant prisoners could be released after serving 40% of their term, rather than
the previous 50%, allowing 1000's of prisoners to be released in order to tackle
overcrowding.
● The Statutory instrument was introduced by Justice Minister Shabana Mahmood, and was
debated for 90 minutes in the commons.
○ The use of secondary legislation, which does not require a full vote in parliament, to
implement significant and controversial policy change has prompted debate over
whether there was a lack of effective scrutiny in Parliament.
● This shows how secondary legislation is a key power of the executive, and allows them to
have significant control over legislation and policy.
Proposing A Budget and Making Decisions About Fiscal Policy
● The executive makes key decisions on economic policy and proposes a budget.
○ The Chancellor of the Exchequer sets out proposed levels of taxation and public
spending in the budget, following negotiations in cabinet and with government
departments.
○ The Chancellor also says how they expect the economy to perform, in terms of
growth, inflation and changes to government debt.
● Traditionally, budgets are presented in March, but when there is a new government they
may have a first budget earlier, as Chancellor Rachel Reeves did in October 2024.
The Labour Government’s First Budget In October 2024:
● On 30 October 2024, Rachel Reeves delivered Labour’s first budget since 2010, making
her the first female Chancellor to ever do so.
● Reeves announced tax rises worth £40bn, including:
○ An increase in Capital Gains Tax on profits from selling shares.
○ An increase in employers National Insurance contributions to raise an additional
£25bn per year.
○ Tax will be at the highest rate it has ever been in the UK, at 38.2% of GDP.
● Reeves also announced increased public spending and changes that would help workers,
including:
○ Increasing the minimum wage for over-21s drom £11.44/hour to £12.21/hour, and
increasing it for 18 to 20-year-olds from £8.60/hour to £10/hour.
○ An extra £22.6bn for day-to-day spending on the NHS.
○ £6.7bn for education investment next year, including £1.4bn for rebuilding schools.
○ Increasing the affordable homes budget by £500m.
○ There was also a significant increase in borrowing in order to fund public sector
investment, including £5 billion to fund Labour’s housing plan.
● It can be argued that it was actually quite a centrist budget, with the vast majority of taxes
staying the same and public spending not changing that much.
○ Reeves announced that Seven departments have real term revenue cuts next year:
the Foreign Office, the Home Office, Defra, DCMS, Transport, Business and the
Cabinet Office.
○ Corporation tax, Income Tax, National Insurance for workers and VAT were kept the
same, therefore limiting how much can be raised to increase public spending.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 5
The Government’s Decision To Reduce The International Aid Budget As An Example Of The
Government’s Power Over Government Spending:
● The government reduced the UK’s international aid budget from 0.5% to 0.3% of Gross
National Income (GNI) in February 2025 to help fund an increase in defence spending to
2.5% of GDP by 2027.
○ This decision was made without passing new legislation, as the government has the
executive authority to reallocate departmental budgets during the annual spending
review.
○ While the International Development (Official Development Assistance Target) Act
2015 set a legal commitment for the UK to spend 0.7% of GNI on aid, this target
had already been temporarily reduced to 0.5% in 2021 due to economic pressures.
● The government’s ability to further reduce aid spending without parliamentary approval
demonstrates the executive’s power over government spending and fiscal policy, allowing it
to shift funding priorities without the need for separate legislation.
Making Policy Decisions
● The Prime Minister and cabinet set political priorities and determine the country's overall
policy direction, whilst also making day-to-day decisions on policy.
○ These day-to-day decisions were especially important during COVID and decisions
over when restrictions should be added/lifted.
● Boris Johnson’s government was focused on Brexit, tackling COVID and ‘levelling up’.
● Truss set the country in a Thatcherite direction in terms of economic policy, but failed.
● Sunak prioritised tackling immigration and being responsible with national finances,
including bringing down inflation.
Government Cancels Northern Leg Of HS2 Without Parliamentary Approval:
● In October 2023, the government cancelled the northern leg of HS2 (from Birmingham to
Manchester) and pledged to instead reinvest the funds into other regional transport projects
across the North and Midlands.
● HS2 was originally introduced by two laws approved by Parliament; The High Speed Rail
(London - West Midlands) Act 2017 and the High Speed Rail (West Midlands - Crewe) Act
2021. However, the government was able to cancel part of it without asking Parliament due
to the executive’s power to manage policy and the government’s budget.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 6
○ Despite the initial parliamentary approval, the executive branch has the flexibility to
adjust, delay, or even cancel segments based on shifting priorities, given their
authority to manage government spending.
The Main Powers Of The Executive
Royal Prerogative Powers
What Is The History Of The Prerogative Powers?
● Prerogative powers traditionally belonged to the monarch but have over time been
transferred to the Prime Minister and the cabinet.
○ They aren't set out in statute law, but are based on the practice of previous
governments. They are therefore conventions.
What Are The Key Prerogative Powers?
The Power Of Patronage:
● The Prime Minister controls the appointment/firing of all ministers, including cabinet
ministers and junior ministers.
○ This is arguably the most significant of the prerogative powers, as they enable the
Prime Minister to shape their governing team, enforce individual and collective
ministerial responsibility and exercise control over their party.
Cameron Appointed As Foreign Secretary As An Example Of The Power Of Patronage:
● David Cameron was appointed as Foreign Secretary by Rishi Sunak in November 2023,
marking his return to frontline politics seven years after resigning as Prime Minister.
○ To assume the role, Cameron was made a peer as Lord Cameron of Chipping
Norton, breaking with the convention that the key offices of state are traditionally
filled by members of the House of Commons.
● This highlighted the extent of the Prime Minister's powers of patronage, one of the Prime
Minister’s key prerogative powers, as he could bypass parliamentary norms to recruit a
trusted ally.
Declaring War and Authorising The Use of the Armed Forces:
● The executive made the decision to give £2.3 billion of military aid to Ukraine in 2022, whilst
Starmer announced a £2.2 billion loan to Ukraine in March 2025.
● This power has been reduced in recent decades, however, with it now a convention that
House of Commons consent is required before enacting major military action.
○ Blair got parliamentary approval before invading Iraq.
○ In 2013, David Cameron lost a vote on airstrikes in Syria in response to Assad’s use
of chemical weapons and backed down.
○ In 2018, however, Theresa May initiated very similar airstrikes in Syria to those
proposed by Cameron and 2013, without asking for the consent of Parliament.
Sunak Authorises Airstrikes Against Houthis Without Parliamentary Approval:
● In January 2024, Rishi Sunak’s government carried out joint air-strikes with the US against
Houthi targets in response to the Yemeni group attacking cargo ships in the Red Sea.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 7
○ It did so without asking for parliamentary consent, breaking the convention
established since Blair’s invasion of Iraq in 2003 that Parliament should be asked
before the government carried out significant military interventions.
● This shows the government and Prime Minister’s continued prerogative power to declare
war and authorise the use of armed forces.
Signing treaties and negotiating with other countries:
● It is the government that signs treaties and negotiates trade deals with other countries.
○ The March 2023 UK-Asia trade deal (joining the The Comprehensive and
Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership - CPTPP), for example, was
signed without parliamentary consent.
● This is important as it allows the Prime Minister and government to determine and conduct
foreign policy.
The Chagos Islands Treaty As An Example Of International Treaties:
● The UK government’s agreement regarding the Chagos Islands signed in late 2024
demonstrates the powers the executive has due to the royal prerogative powers,
particularly in relation to foreign policy.
○ The proposed agreement, reached after years of negotiations, involves transferring
sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius, while securing the long-term
presence of the UK-US military base on Diego Garcia.
● This deal illustrates the executive’s authority to negotiate and sign international treaties
without needing immediate parliamentary approval.
○ Under the royal prerogative powers, the executive has the authority to negotiate and
sign treaties. These powers are historical privileges vested in the Crown but are
exercised by ministers on behalf of the government.
○ The executive controls foreign policy through these prerogative powers, meaning
the government can independently engage in international diplomacy, sign treaties,
and negotiate agreements without requiring parliamentary consent at the outset.
○ This grants the government significant control over the UK’s foreign relations and
strategic interests.
The UK-India Trade Deal As An Example Of The Royal Prerogative:
● In May 2025, the UK signed a trade deal with India, to reduce tariffs and levies on
imports/exports. Prime Minister Keir Starmer will formally sign the deal, and it is the biggest
bilateral trade deal the UK has struck since leaving the EU. However, there has been a
significant lack of Parliamentary input - demonstrating the executive’s foreign policy powers
and the presidentialisation of the PM.
○ Parliament does not debate the objectives, see the papers or have a meaningful
vote on trade deals - despite Starmer committing in 2021 to let Parliament debate
and vote on trade deals.
● This is because unlike legislation, trade deals are made under the royal prerogative.
○ Parliament cannot amend treaties, including trade deals, and debates and votes on
treaties remain largely at the discretion of the minister. This allows the executive to
ratify treaties without a binding Commons vote.
● This also shows the presidentialisation of the Prime Minister - Prime Ministers are
becoming more like US Presidents who are able to act unilaterally and distance themselves
from the Parliamentary party.
○ The prerogative powers allow them to drive through policy personally, alongside
photo opportunities and media attention, side-lining Parliament.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 8
Taking emergency actions at times of crisis:
● For example, it was the government that organised and led the vaccine rollout in response
to COVID-19.
● In response to the racist far-right riots in the summer of 2024, Starmer put the police on a
national emergency footing and fast tracked cases through the courts.
Calling a General Election:
● The Prime Minister has the power to dissolve Parliament and call a general election
whenever they want.
○ This was removed by the 2011 Fixed Term Parliaments Act, which required a vote of
no confidence in the government or support from 2/3rds of MPs in order to trigger
an election.
○ The Fixed Term Parliaments Act was repealed by Boris Johnson’s government in
2022, though.
Awarding honours:
● Both the Prime Minister and monarch have to approve these.
Granting legal pardons:
● These are seldom used in the UK.
📜 Control Over The Legislative Agenda 📜
● The executive controls the legislative timetable and proposes the majority of bills.
○ Private Members’ Bills have very little chance of success if not backed by the
government.
○ It is also rare for the government to lose votes in the House of Commons at any
point of its passage, due to the majority they normally holds.
■ Tony Blair was defeated just four times in his 10 years in office, all of which
were in his third term.
○ It is more common when the government has a smaller/no majority, though.
■ Theresa May was defeated thirty-three times when she had a minority
government.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 9
● In the House of Commons, the government can use a ‘guillotine’ (allocation of time motion)
to end debate on a particular clause in a bill, helping it to ensure that key votes take place
and their legislative agenda is passed.
○ Since 2002, it has also been possible for the government to carry over uncompleted
legislation from one session to the next without having to start the process again.
● The opposition and Backbench Business Committee have some control over parliamentary
time, but it is limited, with just 20 Opposition days and 13 days for Private Members’ Bills in
each parliamentary session.
Secondary Legislative Powers
● Bills, which turn into Acts of Parliament, are known as Primary Legislation.
○ These Acts empower government ministers to make further changes/regulations
within the scope of the law after it has become law.
● These regulations are known as secondary/delegated legislation and can be changed by
ministers using ‘statutory instruments’, around 3,500 of which are introduced a year across
all areas of government legislation. They can initiate highly significant changes to the law
and policy.
○ For example, statutory instruments are used to ban new substances by adding them
to a list under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.
○ In 2016, the government abolished maintenance grants for university students and
allowed fracking in national parks in England using secondary legislation.
● Statutory Instruments are scrutinised by the Select Committee On Statutory Instruments,
which considers whether they should be drawn to special attention of the House.
○ The majority of statutory instruments are made law by ministers and automatically
become laws unless objected to by Parliament, which is very rare.
○ Around ⅔ of statutory instruments become law without being debated by MPs.
Early Prisoners Release as an Example of Secondary Legislation:
● On the 12th of July 2024, the new Labour government approved a Statutory Instrument (a
form of secondary legislation) to deal with the prisons crisis by allowing the early release of
prisoners.
○ This meant prisoners could be released after serving 40% of their term, rather than
the previous 50%, allowing 1000's of prisoners to be released in order to tackle
overcrowding.
● The Statutory instrument was introduced by Justice Minister Shabana Mahmood, and was
debated for 90 minutes in the commons.
○ The use of secondary legislation, which does not require a full vote in parliament, to
implement significant and controversial policy change has prompted debate over
whether there was a lack of effective scrutiny in Parliament.
● This shows how Secondary Legislation is a key power of the executive, and allows them to
have significant control over legislation and policy.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 10
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A
Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 11
