https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover
UK Government
4 Prime Minister and Executive
● 3.2 The concept of ministerial responsibility.
○ The concept of individual ministerial responsibility.
○ The concept of collective ministerial responsibility.
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓
🗣 Key Debates 🗣
● The key debate in relation to this topic alone is whether individual and collective ministerial
responsibility still apply.
○ If you make a detailed plan on the question in bold below, you should be well
prepared for this topic.
● The content from this topic will also be useful for questions that include other parts of the
Prime Minister and Executive topic, including the extent to which the Prime Minister is able
to dominate the cabinet and the extent of the Prime Minister’s power in general.
❓Past/Possible Essay Questions❓
● Evaluate the view that the concepts of individual ministerial responsibility and
collective ministerial responsibility are both still important. (30)
● Evaluate the view that individual ministerial responsibility still applies. (30)
● Evaluate the view that individual and collective ministerial responsibility are too weak to
ensure effective accountability. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the conventions of ministerial responsibility no longer adequately
account for the actions of ministers. (30)
● Evaluate how far the concept of ministerial responsibility remains an important feature of
the UK government. (30)
● Evaluate the view that collective ministerial responsibility still applies (30).
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 1
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover 1
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓ 1
📜 Individual Ministerial Responsibility 📜 2
The Concept Of Individual Ministerial Responsibility 2
Complications And Recent Changes To Individual Ministerial Responsibility 5
Examples Of Individual Ministerial Responsibility And What They Show 6
🗣 The Debate Over Whether Individual Ministerial Responsibility Continues To Be Important
🗣 11
📜 Collective Ministerial Responsibility 📜 12
The Concept Of Collective Ministerial Responsibility 13
The Limits And Exceptions To Collective Ministerial Responsibility 13
Examples Of Collective Ministerial Responsibility And What They Show 16
🗣 The Debate Over Whether Collective Ministerial Responsibility Continues To Be Important
🗣 19
📜 Individual Ministerial Responsibility 📜
The Concept Of Individual Ministerial Responsibility
When Did Individual Ministerial Responsibility Begin
● Prior to the 1994 ‘Nolan Principles’, there was no codification of the responsibilities of
government ministers and what was expected of them.
○ The Nolan Principles outlined 7 key principles that were expected of government
ministers: (1) leadership (2) honesty (3) accountability (4) openness (5) selflessness
(6) integrity (7) objectivity.
● After the election of Tony Blair in 1997, these were then set out in the Ministerial Code,
which is published by the Prime Minister at the start of each administration to make clear
the expectations of government ministers.
● Individual Ministerial Responsibility is a convention, rather than being a statute law passed
by Parliament that is binding.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 2
What Does Individual Ministerial Responsibility Set Out
● All government ministers, including the Prime Minister, are drawn from Parliament and are
therefore accountable to it.
○ This is both in relation to (1) their responsibility for the performance of their
department (2) their integrity and personal conduct.
Responsibility For Department:
● The current Ministerial Code sets out that "Ministers have a duty to parliament to account,
and be held to account, for the policies, decisions and actions of their departments and
agencies."
○ The idea that government ministers are responsible for the running, policies and
performance of their departments and can be held to account by Parliament for this
is key to individual ministerial responsibility.
○ Ministers are expected to accept responsibility for any failures or criticisms of their
department. If there are any key failures or they are unable to effectively run their
department, they are expected to resign.
■ It is accepted that a minister can’t be expected to know every single thing
going on in their department and shouldn’t be forced to resign due to a minor
mistake, though.
● The current Ministerial Code also sets out “It is of paramount importance that Ministers give
accurate and truthful information to Parliament, correcting any inadvertent error at the
earliest opportunity. Ministers who knowingly mislead Parliament will be expected to offer
their resignation to the Prime Minister”.
○ Ministers are therefore also obliged to give accurate information to Parliament and
to offer their resignation to the Prime Minister if they knowingly mislead Parliament.
○ Ministers should also correct any accidental misleading of Parliament as quickly as
possible.
Responsibility For Personal Conduct:
● Ministers are also responsible for their personal conduct and professionalism. If their
personal conduct falls below what is expected of them, they are expected to offer their
resignation. This is a far more common cause of ministerial resignations than departmental
failures.
○ The Ministerial Code sets out “Ministers of the Crown are expected to maintain high
standards of behaviour and to behave in a way that upholds the highest standards
of propriety.”
○ The Ministerial Code also specifically states “Harassing, bullying or other
inappropriate or discriminating behaviour wherever it takes place is not consistent
with the Ministerial Code and will not be tolerated.”
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 3
How Is Individual Ministerial Responsibility Enforced?
● Though they are supposed to be advised by their Independent Advisor, it is ultimately the
Prime Minister that enforces the Ministerial Code.
○ They are the ‘Judge, Jury and Executioner’ and the enforcement of individual
ministerial responsibility is therefore entirely dependent on the Prime Minister.
○ As we have seen with ‘Partygate’, there is no mechanism to hold the Prime Minister
themselves to account when they are accused of wrongdoing.
Keir Starmers Changes To The Ministerial Code:
● On the 6th November 2024, Keir Starmer published his new and updated ministerial code.
This sets out the standard of conduct expected of ministers, and is key in the enforcement
of Individual Ministerial Responsibility (IMR).
○ IMR is a constitutional convention where government ministers are expected to take
responsibility for their own actions, and all decisions made within their department.
● These represented a substantial change to that of Sunak’s code, as Starmer pledged to
restore faith in politics as “public service”.
○ A key change was to the powers of the independent advisor on ministerial
standards, previously, the PM must consent in order for them to launch an
investigation.
○ Now, the advisor is able to launch investigations independently, even when it's not
politically advantageous for the Government, as occurred in relation to Tulip Siddiq
in January 2025, who referred herself to the Independent Advisor.
● Additionally, the new code allows the advisor to determine if an investigation finds a breach
of the ministerial code. Previously, the PM was the judge of standards, which made them
the “judge, jury and executioner”.
○ This was highlighted when Boris Johnson refused to accept the results of an
investigation into Priti Patel and bullying accusations, prompting the resignation of
his advisor.
● Finally, the new code tightens rules surrounding ministers declaration of interests to bring
them in line with MPs standards, meaning they now have to declare gifts on a monthly
basis.
○ This shows a significant strengthening in IMR which has been weakened under
Johnson, who removed the Nolan Principles from the code and removed the
obligation for ministers to resign.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 4
Complications And Recent Changes To Individual Ministerial Responsibility
Civil Servants Being Blamed
● Especially in the past decade, there have been instances where the lines of accountability
have been blurred and civil servants have been held accountable for failings within
departments, rather than government ministers.
○ Traditionally, civil servants were anonymous and took no credit or blame for the
actions of governments, as it was the job of ministers to ensure civil servants had
the necessary skills to carry out their roles effectively.
● In March 2023, Suella Braverman sent an email to Conservative Party supporters blaming
“an activist blob of leftwing lawyers, civil servants and the Labour party” for the failure of her
department (the Home Office) to stop Channel crossings.
● Following the failure of the exams algorithm in the summer of 2020, head of Ofqual Sally
Collier resigned, having overseen the development of the algorithm, whilst Secretary of
State for Education at the time Gavin Williamson didn’t resign.
Executive Agencies
● Some government functions are delegated to ‘executive agencies’ under director generals,
rather than under the direct control of government ministers. These include the Prison
Service, Court Service and DVLA.
○ As a consequence, there is doubt over who should be held accountable for failures,
with the minister responsible for the overall policy area, by the direct generals
exercising ‘operational responsibility’.
● In 1995 the Home Secretary Michael Howard controversially sacked Derek Lewis, the
director general of the Prisons Service, after criticism of the escape of prisoners from
Parkhurst Jail.
👱 Boris Johnson Changes To Ministerial Code In May 2022 👱
● In May 2022, after the ‘Partygate’ scandal broke out and dominated the news, Boris
Johnson revised the Ministerial Code.
○ There is a lot of suspicion Johnson did so to prevent himself and many of his
ministers having to resign over Partygate, as he and others (including Rishi Sunak),
misled Parliament.
● The key change Johnson made was to weaken the rules on individual ministerial
responsibility so that ministers who breach the Ministerial Code are no longer expected to
resign, but to publicly apologise and/or accept a reduction in their pay.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 5
○ Mentions of ‘honesty’, ‘transparency’, ‘integrity’ and ‘accountability’ were also
removed from the foreword to the Ministerial Code.
Examples Of Individual Ministerial Responsibility And What They Show
✅ Examples Where Ministers Did Resign ✅
Estelle Morris In 2002:
● In 2002, Estelle Morris resigned as Secretary of State for Education and Skills, after her
department hadn’t met the literacy and numeracy targets they set.
● In her resignation letter to Prime Minister Tony Blair, she stated: "I am less good at strategic
management of a huge department and I am not good at dealing with the modern media...I
have not felt I have been as effective as I should be, or as effective as you need me to be."
○ She felt well equipped and suited to being Schools Minister, but not to being
Secretary of State for Education and Skills.
● This shows that individual ministerial responsibility in relation to responsibility for
departmental failures certainly used to be important, with a minister even resigning without
being pushed to by the Prime Minister.
Amber Rudd In 2018:
● In April 2018, Amber Rudd resigned as Home Secretary after inadvertently misleading the
Home Affairs Select Committee. She had said to the committee that she was unaware of
any deportation removal targets within the department, despite the evidence showing she
had documents that said exactly that.
○ At the time, Rudd and the Home Office were under massive media scrutiny over the
Windrush Scandal.
● This shows that individual ministerial responsibility in relation to responsibility for
departmental policies and misleading parliament was still important for Rudd in 2018,
though the media pressure likely played a part in convincing her to offer her resignation.
Matt Hancock In 2021:
● In June 2021, then Health Secretary Matt Hancock resigned after a video showed him
having an extramarital affair with a colleague, which also meant he had breached his own
department's COVID regulations.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 6
○ Hancock originally just apologised, which Prime Minister Boris Johnson accepted
and said the matter was ‘closed’. Ultimately, however, the media and public
backlash grew too big and he resigned a week later.
● On the one hand, this could be used to show that individual ministerial responsibility in
relation to personal conduct was still important under Boris Johnson.
○ On the other hand, the fact Hancock originally tried to just apologise rather than
resign, and Johnson’s acceptance of it, could be used to show that individual
ministerial responsibility wasn’t important. Instead, it was the media and public
backlash that proved important.
Suella Braverman in 2022:
● In October 2022, Suella Braverman was forced to resign as Home Secretary under Liz
Truss’ administration after it emerged she had used her personal email to send classified
information, which was a serious breach of the Ministerial Code.
○ Braverman was forced to resign by Truss. In her resignation letter, she criticised the
Prime Minister with the following statements:
■ “Pretending we haven’t made mistakes, carrying on as if everyone can’t see
that we have made them, and hoping that things will magically come right is
not serious politics. I have made a mistake; I accept responsibility; I resign.
■ “It is obvious to everyone that we are going through a tumultuous time. I
have concerns about the direction of this government. Not only have we
broken key pledges that were promised to our voters, but I have had serious
concerns about this government’s commitment to honouring manifesto
commitments.”
● Despite her resignation, Braverman was reappointed as Home Secretary just weeks later
by new Prime Minister Rishi Sunak.
● This shows how Prime Ministers can enforce individual ministerial responsibility when a
minister has failed and could be used to suggest that individual ministerial responsibility
was again important under Truss. The fact Braverman was reappointed by Sunak just
weeks later, though, shows the limits of individual ministerial responsibility’s importance.
Nadim Zahawi in 2023:
● In January 2023, Conservative Party Chair Nadim Zahawi was forced to resign by Prime
Minister Rishi Sunak after the PM’s ethics adviser concluded Zahawi had breached the
Ministerial Code by failing to tell officials he was under investigation by the tax authorities
when appointed Chancellor under Boris Johnson.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 7
○ Sunak was criticised for not taking action sooner and described as weak, with it
being suspected that the Prime Minister was waiting to see if the media pressure
would die down, as Zahawi was an important government ally.
● This shows how individual ministerial responsibility in relation to personal conduct can still
be seen as important under Rishi Sunak, though media pressure certainly did play a role.
Dominic Raab in 2023:
● Deputy Prime Minister and Secretary of State for Justice Dominic Raab resigned in April
2023 after allegations of bullying and mistreatment of staff from over 20 civil servants.
○ Rishi Sunak failed to force Raab to resign immediately, instead he set up an inquiry
into the bullying allegations in February 2023. Raab promised to resign from the
government if the inquiry concluded he bullied civil servants, which it did.
● This shows that IMR in relation to personal conduct is important under Sunak and more
important than it was under Boris Johnson, when Priti Patel wasn’t forced to resign after
similar allegations.
Louise Haigh in 2024:
● In November 2024, Secretary of State for Transport Louise Haigh resigned after news
reports emerged of a fraud conviction in 2010. Haigh told Starmer about this conviction in
2020 when she was appointed to shadow cabinet, however she only resigned after the
Times and Sky News revealed details of it.
○ This has been criticised as despite Starmer knowing about the criminal conviction
and the context surrounding it, he chose to appoint her to cabinet anyway and only
fired her after they were revealed by the press.
○ This shows the impact of the press and their ability to hold the government to
account by exposing scandals.
● This is also an example of IMR - Haigh has been accused of breaking the ministerial code
which states ministers must act with openness, honesty and integrity.
○ However, it highlights the weakness of IMR as it is not enforced consistently and
depends on political circumstances and if it benefits the Government.
Tulip Siddiq's In 2025:
● On Tuesday the 14th of January 2025, Treasury Minister Tulip Siddiq resigned following an
anti-corruption investigation in Bangladesh, which she was named in.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 8
○ The corruption probe alleged that the MP’s family embezzled up to £3.9bn from
infrastructure spending in Bangladesh linked to her aunt, the former Bangladeshi
Prime Minister.
● After referring herself to the Prime Minister's ethics watchdog, it was found she had not
breached the ministerial code however she resigned as she had a "serious conflict of
interests", as her responsibilities as Treasury Minister covered combating illicit finance and
corruption.
○ This is a useful recent example of Individual Ministerial Responsibility (IMR), a
constitutional convention whereby ministers are responsible for their personal
conduct, and if it falls below what is expected of them or they aren’t able to do their
job effectively as a result, they are expected to offer their resignation.
Andrew Gwynne In 2025:
● In February 2025, Labour Health Minister and MP for Gordon and Denton Andrew Gwynne
was fired and lost the Labour whip following the emergence of offensive messages he’d
written.
○ These included Gwynne saying he hoped a pensioner who did not vote Labour
would die, calling a voter a hag and insulting fellow MPs.
● The Government said they were determined to uphold high standards for those in public
office and that the WhatsApp messages were completely unacceptable.
○ This is a clear example of Individual Ministerial Responsibility (IMR), a convention
that all government ministers should be responsible for their personal conduct and
professionalism. If their behaviour violates the ministerial code or falls below what is
expected of them, they are expected to resign.
● Since coming to Government, the Labour Party has strengthened the ministerial code and
have been seen to restore IMR within government following a significant deterioration of the
convention under the Conservatives.
❌ Examples Where Ministers Didn’t Resign ❌
Gillian Keegan Not Resigning In 2023 Over RAAC As An Example Of Individual Ministerial
Responsibility Not Being Applied:
● In September 2023, when reinforced autoclaved aerated concrete (RAAC) was discovered
in over 100 schools, Education Secretary Gillian Keegan chose not to resign, instead
attributing blame to others.
○ RAAC poses significant risks as it is much weaker and less structurally sound than
other concrete.
● Keegan criticised school administrators for not completing government questionnaires on
RAAC and insisted they needed to "get off their backsides", whilst also criticising local
authorities’ lack of previous action.
○ She therefore took no responsibility, dispite others pointing out that the crisis was a
direct result of Conservative Party decisions to cut capital budgets, and maintained
she had done a good job in her role.
● Keegan's failure to resign/take responsibility is a clear example of individual ministerial
responsibility not being fully applied, as she did not take personal responsibility for the
RAAC issue despite being the minister overseeing the education department and instead
blamed others.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 9
Chris Grayling In 2019:
● In May 2019, Transport Secretary Chris Grayling didn’t resign despite serious failings in his
department that included giving a multi-million pound ferry contract to a company that had
never owned a ferry. This contract ultimately had to be cancelled, at a major cost to the
taxpayer.
○ As a consequence of his failures, Grayling was ridiculed in the media and
nicknamed ‘Failing Grayling’.
● This shows that individual ministerial responsibility in relation to departmental failures
wasn’t important even with significant media pressure for a resignation, in part because
forcing Grayling to resign would’ve admitted the government’s failure.
Priti Patel In 2020:
● In 2020, an independent investigation concluded that then Home Secretary Priti Patel had
bullied civil servants, which is a clear breach of individual ministerial responsibility in
relation to personal conduct.
○ Patel failed to offer her resignation and Prime Minister Boris Johnson failed to force
her to resign, however, in part due to the fact that she was a ‘big beast’ with a lot of
political power and was very popular with the right wing of the Conservative Party
due to her strong stance on immigration.
○ Sir Alex Allen, the author of the report, resigned in protest of the fact his findings
were ignored.
● This shows that individual ministerial responsibility in relation to personal conduct was not
important despite a clear breach of the Ministerial Code, in part due to party political
considerations.
Gavin Williamson In 2020:
● In the summer of 2020, Education Secretary Gavin Williamson oversaw major failings in his
department, in particular the failure of the exams algorithm to determine GCSE and A Level
results. Despite this, he remained in office for over a year afterwards.
○ Head of Ofqual Sally Collier (a civil servant) did resign, though.
● This shows that individual ministerial responsibility in relation to departmental failures was
not important despite a clear breach of the Ministerial Code, with a civil servant allowed to
take the blame by both Williamson and Prime Minister Boris Johnson.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 10
Boris Johnson In 2022:
● In 2022, the ‘Partygate’ scandal broke out in the media, revealing that there had been a
number of parties in Number 10 during COVID lockdowns that had broken the
government’s own laws and guidance.
○ Boris Johnson and other key ministers attended, whilst Johnson specifically
knowingly misled Parliament about the parties. Despite this, Johnson didn’t resign.
○ As mentioned above, in May 2022, Johnson changed the Ministerial Code to
weaken the rules on individual ministerial responsibility so that ministers who breach
the Ministerial Code are no longer expected to resign.
● This key example shows that individual ministerial responsibility in relation to personal
conduct and responsibility for departmental failure was very unimportant and had broken
down under Boris Johnson’s government.
○ Crucially, it also shows that individual ministerial responsibility is a weak convention
that is very dependent on the Prime Minister as ‘judge, jury and executioner’.
○ If the Prime Minister themselves has broken individual ministerial responsibility,
there is no mechanism to hold them to account.
🗣 The Debate Over Whether Individual Ministerial Responsibility Continues
To Be Important 🗣
❌ Arguments That It Doesn’t Remain Important ❌
● Individual ministerial responsibility is very dependent on the personal honour of individual
ministers, who are unlikely to offer their resignations if it will damage their career prospects
and mean they take a pay cut.
○ This is especially the case if an individual Prime Minister is very important to the
career prospects of a minister and they are unpopular with other parts of the party.
● Individual ministerial responsibility is also very dependent on the Prime Minister as ‘judge,
jury and executioner’.
○ This a big weakness, as (1) Prime Ministers are hesitant to make their government
look weak/incompetent by sacking ministers. (2) Prime Ministers don’t like forcing
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 11
resignations from political allies they can rely on. (3) Some Prime Ministers (Boris
Johnson especially) have very low standards in relation to personal conduct and
departmental performance.
○ Even though Starmer has sought to change the rules to mean that his independent
adviser makes the final decision rather than him as Prime Minister, he may still
place political pressure on his adviser to not sack one of his key allies.
● Rather than following the Ministerial Code, Prime Ministers often decide whether to force
resignations from ministers based on the media and public backlash and the extent to
which it is damaging their personal popularity and that of their party.
○ Tony Blair’s ‘spin doctor’ Alastair Campbell was believed to have had a 'golden rule'
that a minister should have to resign if they were at the centre of a media storm for
a given length of time.
● There was a near complete breakdown of individual ministerial responsibility under Boris
Johnson and it is possible this has set a precedent that has permanently weakened the
convention.
○ This can perhaps be seen in Sunak’s long delay in sacking Zahawi, suggesting it
was based on the media backlash, and failure to quickly force the resignation of
Dominic Raab despite many allegations of bullying.
✅ Arguments That It Remains Important ✅
● Though individual ministerial responsibility was unimportant in Johnson’s government, it
could be argued this was an aberration due to his personal low standards and that
individual ministerial responsibility became important again under Sunak.
○ The resignations of Braverman under Truss and Zahawi & Raab under Sunak could
suggest that individual ministerial responsibility has regained importance.
● Starmer has stated his intention to hold ministers to the ministerial code strongly, promising
a government of service and he has increased the powers of his ministerial standards
watchdog.
○ This includes by allowing Sir Laurie Magnus, his Independent Adviser on Ministers’
Interests, to initiate his own investigations, rather than beginning them only after a
request from No 10. Magnus will also make the final decision according to these
changes, rather than the PM being the ‘judge, jury and executioner’.
📜 Collective Ministerial Responsibility 📜
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 12
The Concept Of Collective Ministerial Responsibility
Introduction To Collective Ministerial Responsibility
● Like individual ministerial responsibility, collective ministerial responsibility is a convention
that is included in the Ministerial Code and applies to all ministers.
○ It is intended to promote government unity in the face of opposition and mean that
the government as a whole is responsible to Parliament for its decisions.
● As with individual ministerial responsibility, it is enforced by the Prime Minister, who is
supposed to use their powers of patronage to force ministerial resignations if it isn’t
followed.
The Key Aspects Of Collective Ministerial Responsibility
● Government ministers are collectively responsible for all of the government’s policies and
must therefore all resign if the government loses a vote of confidence in Parliament.
● Ministers can privately disagree in cabinet meetings, but the discussions in these meetings
are kept secret and ministers must support and defend all of the government’s policies in
public and in the media, even if they personally/privately disagree with them.
● A minister must resign from the government before publicly criticising government policy. If
a minister criticises government policy without resigning, then the Prime Minister should
force them to resign.
○ Not all resignations have to do with matters of principle, but may be complicated by
personality clashes and ambitions.
Why Resignations On Grounds Of Collective Ministerial Responsibility Are Rare
● Resignations due to collective ministerial responsibility are rare as resigning from the
government can end a minister’s political career.
○ Rather than taking a public stand, ministers are more likely to leak their
dissatisfaction to the media or fight their corner within government.
The Limits And Exceptions To Collective Ministerial Responsibility
Exceptions To Collective Ministerial Responsibility
● Prime Ministers can decide to suspend collective ministerial responsibility if they deem it
necessary for the government to function effectively or politically advantageous, for
example if it prevents their party becoming divided.
Free Votes:
● On certain controversial/sensitive issues, Prime Ministers have allowed ‘free votes’, where
ministers are allowed to vote how they wish.
○ In 2013, David Cameron allowed a free vote on the legalisation of same-sex
marriage, which Phillip Hammond voted against.
○ In 2024, Starmer allowed a free vote on a the Terminally Ill Adults (End of Life) Bill
2024, a private members’ bill that supported introducing assisted dying for terminally
ill adults in the UK.
Sunak Holds Free Votes On Divisive Issues To Avoid Cabinet Resignations:
● Rishi Sunak has strategically held two free votes on contentious issues to prevent cabinet
resignations and maintain unity.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 13
● When Parliament considered the Privileges Committee's report on Boris Johnson in June
2023, which recommended a 90 day suspension. Sunak allowed Tory MPs a free vote.
○ Several ministers, including Kemi Badenoch and Penny Mourdant, chose to abstain
rather than support the report, reflecting their loyalty to Johnson.
● Similarly, on the Tobacco and Vapes Bill in April 2024, which sought to incrementally
increase the legal smoking age, ministers including Badenoch and Steve Bakerexercised
their right to dissent and voted against the measure, citing personal and constituency
concerns.
● This shows how collective ministerial responsibility can be suspended in particular cases in
order to maintain the unity of the cabinet and government.
Referendums:
● Prime Ministers have frequently suspended collective ministerial responsibility during
referendums in order to prevent the issue of the referendum dividing and harming the
government.
○ In the 1975 European Communities Referendum, Harold Wilson recognised that he
had to allow ministers to campaign on both sides of the argument in order to prevent
resignations by anti-Europeans.
■ Anti-Europeans were allowed to argue their cases in public, but then had to
unite behind the people's verdict. The only condition was that the official
government position was to remain in Europe and opponents couldn't speak
against membership from the dispatch box in the House of Commons, a rule
which Industry Minister Eric Heffer was sacked for breaking.
○ Cameron faced an equally divided Conservative Party in 2016 and reluctantly
agreed to suspend collective responsibility on the European issue.
The 2010 Coalition Government:
● From the outset of the 2010 coalition government, it was agreed that Liberal Democrat
ministers wouldn't be bound by collective responsibility on four key issues on which they
strongly disagreed with the Conservatives.
○ Liberal Democrat ministers were allowed to abstain in votes on: (1) the construction
of nuclear power stations (2) tax allowances for married couples (3) higher
education funding and (4) the renewal of Trident.
○ The parties also took opposing sides in the 2011 Alternative Vote Referendum.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 14
Limits To Collective Ministerial Responsibility
● Collective ministerial responsibility has limited power in certain situations, particularly when
Prime Ministers are weak within their party and therefore can’t risk forcing the resignation of
important figures in the party.
Leaking:
● Rather than publicly resigning, ministers who disagree with government policy sometimes
leak their dissatisfaction to the media and to the rest of the party.
○ If they are accused of leaking, they can deny it and maintain ‘plausible deniability’.
‘Big Beasts’ who are above Collective Ministerial Responsibility:
● Some ministers who are important figures within politics and the government’s party (‘Big
Beasts’) are above collective ministerial responsibility, as they are too powerful/popular to
sack. Sacking them may cause a revolt from a part of the party and therefore risk bringing
down the government.
○ As a result, they are able to anonymously/quietly brief against the government or
other ministers.
Ideological Disunity Within The Party:
● If the governing party, and therefore the government, is fundamentally ideologically
disunited, then collective ministerial responsibility becomes limited as a concept.
○ Under Theresa May, for example, the divide within the Conservative Party and
government between hardline Brexiteers including those in the European Research
Group (ERG) and One Nation Conservatives such as Phillip Hammond, made
maintaining government unity extremely difficult.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 15
Examples Of Collective Ministerial Responsibility And What They Show
✅ Examples Where Collective Ministerial Responsibility Was Important ✅
Annelise Dodds’ Resignation As International Development Minister As An Example Of CMR:
● In February 2025, Annelise Dodds resigned as International Development Minister following
the Prime Minister Keir Starmer's decision to cut the international aid budget by almost
50%, from 0.5% of Gross National Income (GNI) to 0.3%.
○ This was done to increase defence spending, however Dodds warned it could
enable Russia and China to increase their global influence whilst harming the UK's
reputation.
● This is a significant resignation of a high profile minister who attended Cabinet, due to the
fact that she could not personally support and defend the government's decision publicly
and maintain her principles.
○ In her resignation letter, she criticised the decision and stated that it would “remove
food and healthcare from desperate people,” thereby “deeply harming the UK’s
reputation.”
● This is a crucial example of Collective Ministerial Responsibility (CMR) in practice; a
convention that applies to all ministers and is intended to promote government unity.
○ Ministers are collectively responsible for all of the government's policies and
decisions - they can privately disagree in cabinet meetings but must resign before
publicly dissenting from government policy.
○ Resignations due to CMR are usually rare, as resigning from the government can
end a minister's political career.
Lord Wolfson Over Partygate In 2022:
● In April 2022, Justice Minister Lord Wolfson resigned from the government, as he said he
couldn’t continue to support a government that broke the rule of law and failed to accept
responsibility for breaking the law with numerous parties in number 10 during lockdown.
● This shows that collective ministerial responsibility was still important, as Wolfson resigned
rather than accepting collective responsibility for the government’s actions.
Robin Cook Over The Iraq War In 2003:
● One of the best examples of a minister resigning because they didn’t want to accept
collective ministerial responsibility on a particular issue out of principle was Leader of the
House Robin Cook, who resigned in 2003 in opposition to Blair’s decision to invade Iraq.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 16
○ In a resignation speech in Parliament, he stated that he could not “accept collective
responsibility for the decision to commit Britain now to military action in Iraq without
international agreement or domestic support.”
● This shows how collective ministerial responsibility was important, as a minister resigned
rather than having to publicly support the government in relation to a policy he disagreed
with.
The Supreme Court Ruling In For Women Scotland Ltd v The Scottish Ministers (2025) As An
Example Of CMR:
● On the 16th of April 2025, the UK Supreme Court ruled that the legal definition of a ‘woman’
in the Equality Act (2010) was based on biological sex in For Women Scotland Ltd v The
Scottish Ministers (2025).
● Pressure group ForWomenScotland challenged the Scottish Government's implementation
of the Gender Representation on Public Boards (Scotland) Act (2018).
○ They argued that the legislation was unlawful as it changed the meaning of “sex”
outlined in the Equality Act (2010) by including transgender people with Gender
Recognition Certificates in their definition of sex.
○ The role of the court was to clarify the interpretation of the words “sex” and “woman”
in the Equality Act (2010).
● The court ruled the Scottish Parliament did not have the legal authority to redefine terms in
a UK wide law.
○ This is a good example of collective ministerial responsibility (CMR) as in the few
years prior to the ruling, Starmer and other members of the Labour cabinet had said
that they include trans women in their definition of ‘woman’, but quickly switched
following the ruling after Starmer changed his stance. Equalities minister Bridget
Phillipson argued the decision protected single-sex spaces when facing questions in
the House of Commons.
■ This shows the strength of CMR, as all ministers have to publicly support the
government’s position or resign if they’re not prepared to.
Rishi Sunak Over The Northern Ireland Protocol:
● When he was Chancellor in Boris Johnson’s government, Rishi Sunak publicly supported
and voted for the Northern Ireland Protocol that was a key part of Johnson’s Brexit deal.
○ In February 2023 when Prime Minister himself, however, Sunak criticised the
Northern Ireland Protocol for involving too much paperwork, too many customs
checks and creating a border in the Irish Sea. He replaced it with the Windsor
Framework, which fixed these problems.
● This shows that collective ministerial responsibility was important when he was Chancellor,
as he may have privately disagreed with the government’s Northern Ireland Protocol, but he
publicly supported it in the media.
Suella Braverman’s Sacking As An Example Of Collective Ministerial Responsibility:
● In November 2023, Sunak sacked Suella Braverman as Home Secretary following a
controversial opinion piece in the Times about the Metropolitan Police's handling of
pro-Palestinian protests, accusing the police of "playing favorites" and describing protesters
as "hate marchers."
○ Braverman's piece was published without being reviewed and approved by Downing
Street, therefore violating the ministerial code.
○ Her statements were seen as a direct challenge to Sunak's authority and were
widely criticised by members of the Conservative Party.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 17
● This can be seen as an example of collective ministerial responsibility being enforced, as
Braverman was sacked for breaching the convention that ministers must publicly support
government decisions.
● On the other hand, it could be argued that Braverman's doesn’t simply show collective
ministerial responsibility being enforced because she had previously made many
controversial comments, including that “multiculturalism has failed”, grooming gangs were
"almost all British-Pakistani" and homelessness was a “lifestyle choice” that weren’t directly
aligned with government messaging, without being sacked.
○ Therefore, Sunak’s eventual decision to sack Braverman can be argued to be as a
consequence of growing public and media pressure rather than the ministerial code
being enforced.
Limited Leaking/Dissent From Starmer’s Cabinet So Far:
● So far since the election of the Labour government in the 2024 election, there has been
very limited leaking from the cabinet and there has been no real challenge to Keir Starmer’s
leadership/policy decisions, with all members of the cabinet defending them strongly in the
media; demonstrating strong respect for CMR.
○ This is despite the fact that Starmer and the Labour Party in general are very
unpopular for a government that has just been elected with a huge majority.
○ Starmer’s net favourability in February 2025 was -40% and the Labour Party has
been matched by Reform UK in some recent polls.
● This could be used to suggest that having a large government majority allows the Prime
Minister to dominate their Cabinet, even when they are unpopular.
○ On the other hand, it could also be argued that it is simply due to the fact that there
are few big beasts within the Cabinet who can properly challenge the Prime
Minister, or that it is because the government is still relatively new.
❌ Examples Where Collective Ministerial Responsibility Wasn’t Important ❌
Boris Johnson Leaking When Foreign Secretary Under Theresa May:
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 18
● When Foreign Secretary in Theresa May’s government, Boris Johnson consistently leaked
his dissatisfaction with government policy and briefed against Theresa May, including
writing critical weekly articles in the Daily Telegraph.
○ Due to his popularity within the Conservative Party, particularly with Brexiteers, and
May’s weakness as a Prime Minister, she wasn’t able to sack him.
● This shows how collective ministerial responsibility was limited in importance under
Theresa May, as the fact she was a weak Prime Minister presiding over an ideologically
divided party meant she couldn’t enforce it.
Penny Mordaunt and Robert Buckland Under Liz Truss In 2022:
● In October 2022, Leader of the House of Commons Penny Mordaunt and Welsh Secretary
Robert Buckland publicly opposed Liz Truss’ government’s policy that benefits shouldn’t
rise with inflation, but didn’t resign.
● This shows that collective ministerial responsibility wasn’t important in a weak Liz Truss
government, as government ministers publicly opposed government policy without
resigning or being forced to resign.
Steve Barclay Under Theresa May In 2019:
● In March 2019, Brexit Secretary Steve Barclay voted against his government’s own plans to
extend Article 50 in relation to Brexit, despite defending the plans in the House of
Commons just hours earlier.
○ The vote was not a free vote and Barclary didn’t resign in his role nor wasn’t forced
to resign afterwards.
● This shows how collective ministerial responsibility significantly broke down under Theresa
May, who was unable to enforce it due to her weakness as a party leader and Prime
Minister.
🗣 The Debate Over Whether Collective Ministerial Responsibility Continues
To Be Important 🗣
❌ Arguments That It Doesn’t Remain Important ❌
● The fact that collective ministerial responsibility has been relaxed at times by Prime
Ministers in a number of areas, including free votes, referendums and coalitions, could be
used to suggest that collective ministerial responsibility is no longer important.
● Collective ministerial responsibility has also been shown to break down to a significant
extent when Prime Ministers are weak and the governing party is ideologically divided, with
ministers (especially ‘big beasts’) able to leak their dissatisfaction, brief against the
government and even vote against the government without resigning or being sacked by
the Prime Minister.
○ Theresa May and Liz Truss’ governments are key examples of this.
✅ Arguments That It Remains Important ✅
● It can be argued that collective ministerial responsibility is important the vast majority of the
time, especially when Prime Ministers are stronger. Ministers very rarely speak out against
the government in public even if they disagree with government policy, whilst some
ministers have resigned due to not being able to accept collective responsibility. They are
therefore bound by collective responsibility.
○ Collective ministerial responsibility is effective in allowing the Prime Minister to use
their powers of patronage to control their party and government, whilst encouraging
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 19
important debates within government behind the scenes but maintaining
government unity publicly.
● Rishi Sunak had fewer problems with collective ministerial responsibility than Liz Truss and
Theresa May did, whilst Starmer has so far had no problems with leaking or CMR.
● The fact that collective ministerial responsibility is sometimes relaxed as a necessity to
ensure the government can continue to function shows its flexibility, which can be seen as a
strength of collective ministerial responsibility and something that allows it to continue to be
important.
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A
Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 20
