https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover
UK Government
2 The Constitution
● 1.1 The nature and sources of the UK Constitution, including:
○ an overview of the development of the Constitution through key historical
documents:
■ Magna Carta (1215); Bill of Rights (1689); Act of Settlement (1701); Acts
of Union (1707); Parliament Acts (1911 and 1949)
● the nature of the UK Constitution: unentrenched, uncodified and unitary, and the
‘twin pillars’ of parliamentary sovereignty and the rule of law
● the five main sources of the UK Constitution: statute law; common law; conventions;
authoritative works, and treaties.
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓
🗣 Key Debates and Questions🗣
● Though is is very unlikely there will be an essay question on this content alone,
understanding the concepts in this lesson is very important to being able to answer
questions that incorporate later parts of the constitution topic and other parts of UK
government, such as:
○ Evaluate the view that there are more advantages to having a codified constitution
than remaining with an uncodified constitution. (30)
○ Evaluate the view that Parliament is still sovereign. (30)
○ Evaluate the view that the rule of law and parliamentary sovereignty are no longer
important principles of the UK constitution. (30)
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 1
Parts Of The Specification This Lesson Covers 1
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓ 1
📜 The Nature Of The UK Constitution 📜 2
Uncodified 2
Unentrenched 2
Unitary 2
🏛 The ‘Twin Pillars’ Of The UK Constitution 🏛 3
The Westminster Model 3
The Historical Development Of The UK Constitution 4
📜 7 Key Historical Documents 📜 4
How The UK Constitution Developed 5
📜 The 5 Main Sources Of The UK Constitution 📜 5
Treaties 6
Statute Law 6
📚 Authoritative Texts 📚 7
Common Law 7
Conventions 7
Recent Developments/Constitutional Issues 8
A Decrease In Parliamentary Sovereignty? 8
The 2019 Prorogation Court Case 9
📜 The Nature Of The UK Constitution 📜
Uncodified
● The UK Constitution is said to be uncodified as, unlike in the US, it isn’t written down in a
single document.
○ Whilst some parts of it are written down (such as treaties), other parts are unwritten.
Unentrenched
● Unlike in the US, where it is very difficult to change the constitution (requiring
supermajorities from different bodies), the UK constitution can be changed with a simple
majority in parliament.
○ The constitution therefore isn’t different to normal laws and doesn’t have a higher
status or extra protections.
Unitary
● The British Constitution has always been said to be unitary because power was centralised
in just one place; the UK Parliament, which was sovereign.
○ Since devolution, there have been questions around whether this is still the case.
■ Some argue the UK constitution is still unitary as the UK Parliament has
handed power to the devolved bodies but can also take it away when they
want and therefore retains legal sovereignty.
■ Others argue the UK constitution is no longer unitary and Britain is now a
‘Union State’ or quasi-federal state because the power has been
permanently devolved and it would be difficult to revoke.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 2
🏛 The ‘Twin Pillars’ Of The UK Constitution 🏛
● A.V. Dicey was a key constitutional theorist. In 1885 he argued that the two key ‘pillars’
underpinning the UK constitution were parliamentary sovereignty and the rule of law.
Parliamentary Sovereignty
● Parliamentary Sovereignty refers to the fact that the UK Parliament is ‘sovereign’ within the
UK constitution:
○ It is the key law making and amending body in Britain (when Dicey was writing, it
was the only law making and amending body).
○ It can make laws on any subject, including making changes to the constitution.
○ It cannot bind its successors nor be bound by its predecessors.
■ No law, including constitutional laws, can be entrenched.
○ No court or higher body, including the Supreme Court, can strike down a law passed
by parliament.
■ This wasn’t the case when Britain was in the EU, as the European Court of
Justice could do so.
The Rule Of Law
● Nobody is above the law and everyone must obey it. This applies to all people and bodies,
including politicians, judges and government officials, who are not above the law.
○ The law therefore treats everyone as equal.
● Everyone has the right to a fair trial and to know their charges.
● Judges must be neutral and free from political interference, which is ensured by being well
paid and difficult to sack.
The Westminster Model
● The ‘Westminster Model’ is used to describe a form of constitution and government based
on the British political system. It includes the following elements:
○ Parliamentary sovereignty.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 3
○ The fusion of the executive and the legislature (All members of the government are
Members of Parliament and accountable to Parliament).
○ Political power is centralised.
The Historical Development Of The UK Constitution
📜 7 Key Historical Documents 📜
● The following seven historical documents were important to the development of the UK
constitution. They are key to understanding it today.
1215 Magna Carta
● Set out for the first time the principle that no-one should be deprived of liberty and property
without the due process of law.
○ Therefore was important to what later became the Rule of Law.
1689 Bill of Rights
● Included provisions for regular parliaments, free elections and freedom of speech within
parliament.
○ Therefore was important to the move towards Parliamentary Sovereignty and away
from the power of the monarch.
The 1701 Act of Settlement
● Established the right of parliament to determine the line of succession to the throne.
○ Therefore further increased the power of parliament in comparison to the power of
the monarch.
The 1707 Acts of Union
● United England and Scotland under one parliament in Westminster, with representatives
from both countries.
○ Therefore increased the centralisation of power in the UK Parliament.
The 1911 & 1949 Parliaments Acts
● The 1911 act set out that the House of Lords couldn't delay money bills and only had a
2-year delaying power for other bills, rather than the veto they previously had. This delaying
power was reduced to 1-year in 1949.
○ These acts therefore increased the power of the House of Commons in comparison
to the House of Lords.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 4
󰎾 The 1972 European Communities Act 󰎾
● Confirmed the UK’s entrance to the European Economic Community (EEC) which later
developed into the European Union. Also included the principle that EU law would take
precedence over UK law where a conflict occurred.
○ This therefore harmed parliamentary sovereignty.
󰏅 The 2020 UK-EU Withdrawal Agreement 󰏅
● Following the 2016 Brexit referendum, this act removed the UK from the European Union.
○ This therefore increased the sovereignty and power of the UK Parliament once
more.
How The UK Constitution Developed
Overall, These Key Documents Developed The UK Constitution In The Following
Ways
● Reduced the power of the monarch and extended the power of parliament.
● Increased the rights and freedoms of citizens.
● Drew together the components of the UK and centralised power.
● Increased the power of the House of Commons at the expense of the House of Lords.
● Defined the relationship with institutions which later evolved into the EU.
How The Development Of The UK Constitution Was Unique
● The UK hasn't undergone a fundamental, transformative change, such as a revolution or
achieving independence, for a long period. Instead, the political system has evolved
gradually without dramatic breaks in continuity, at least since the civil war.
○ This contrasts with the US, whose constitution was drawn up by founders in 1787
after establishing independence from Britain.
● This gradual development is important to understanding why the UK constitution is
uncodified and unentrenched.
📜 The 5 Main Sources Of The UK Constitution 📜
● The UK Constitution isn’t codified in a single document, but is contained in a number of
different sources. The 5 sources below are the most important sources of the UK
constitution.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 5
Treaties
What are they and how are they significant?
● Treaties are agreements the UK has signed with other states and is therefore bound by.
○ As they are written down and the UK is unlikely to renege on its international
obligations, they make the UK constitution partly codified and more entrenched.
○ This was especially the case when the UK was a member of the EU, as EU treaties
took precedence over UK statute laws passed by parliament.
Examples:
● The UK signed the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) in 1951.
○ It means the individual and bodies in the UK are bound to follow the convention and
can be held to account by the European Court of Human Rights, which isn’t part of
the EU.
● The 2020 UK-EU Withdrawal Agreement established the terms of the UK’s exit from the EU
and includes many provisions for the new relationship between the two bodies, such as
customs and VAT procedures.
Statute Law
What is it and how is it significant?
● Statute law is the body of law passed by parliament. Most laws aren't constitutional, only
those that affect the political system and citizens' rights are.
● It is the most important source of the constitution and includes most of its parts.
○ Because statute laws only require a simple majority in parliament and can be easily
introduced/changed/removed, they make the UK constitution flexible and easy to
change as there is no need for supermajorities.
■ This flexibility can be seen as a positive as it allows for public opinion to be
reflected. It can also be seen as a negative, however, as it could allow a
tyrannical government to easily change the constitution in its favour.
Examples:
● The 1969 Representation of the Peoples Act lowered the voting age to 18.
● The Parliaments Acts of 1911 and 1949 limited the power of the House of Lords.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 6
● The Human Rights Act of 1998 incorporated the ECHR into UK law.
● The Scotland Act and Government of Wales Act, both passed in 1998, introduced
devolution in Scotland and Wales respectively.
📚 Authoritative Texts 📚
What are they and how are they significant?
● Authoritative texts are books that explain the workings of the British political system.
● They're a useful guide and do help to shape the political and constitutional landscape and
how politicians behave.
○ They ultimately aren’t binding and can’t be enforced by law, though.
Examples:
● AV Dicey's study of 1885 set out parliamentary sovereignty and the rule of law as the ‘twin
pillars’ of the UK constitution.
Common Law
What is it and how is it significant?
● Common law is legal principles laid down by judges in their rulings on court cases which
provide precedents for later judgements. These are often clarifications on the exact
implementation of statute laws passed by parliament.
○ It is important in cases where it isn't clear how statute law should be applied.
● It arguably makes it more difficult to enforce the law and makes it less clear, whilst some
argue it is in effect ‘judge-made’ law and therefore gives too much power to unelected
judges, rather than politicians.
Examples:
● The presumption that a person accused of a crime is innocent until proven guilty was
common law for centuries before it became statute law in 1679.
Conventions
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 7
What are they and how are they significant?
● Conventions are customs and practices about how the government should behave that
don't have legal force but have been broadly accepted over time. They can be challenged
and changed by statutes.
○ They can mean that the constitution is weak and relies upon respect for political
institutions (especially from the government), making the constitution difficult to
enforce and fragile if populism succeeded.
■ They can, however, help to quickly overt crises.
● Constitutional conflicts often arise when the assumptions on which a convention is based
change.
○ For example, one could argue that the Salisbury convention (that the House of
Lords doesn’t block anything in a government’s manifesto) was based on the
principle that the Tories had a majority in the House of Lords and should therefore
no longer apply following the 1999 House of Lords Act which removed this majority.
○ Others, however, argue that the Salisbury Convention is based on the House of
Lords being unelected.
● The test of whether a convention still applies is arguably the level of backlash that occurs
when they are broken, either in the House of Commons or among the public.
○ Conventions can therefore be seen as changing with political circumstances.
Examples:
● Individual Ministerial Responsibility holds that ministers should resign over serious mistakes
in their department.
● It is a convention that the monarch will always give royal assent to an act passed by
parliament.
○ The last time this wasn’t granted was in 1707
● The use of referendums to decide key constitutional issues.
○ As seen in the devolution referendums, AV referendum, Scottish Independence
Referendum and 2016 EU referendum.
Recent Developments/Constitutional Issues
A Decrease In Parliamentary Sovereignty?
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 8
● In the last few decades, there have been a number of developments that could be argued
to have decreased the sovereignty of parliament.
○ When the UK was a member of the EU, parliamentary sovereignty was certainly
decreased, as EU law was ‘higher law’ and the European Court of Justice could
strike down laws passed by parliament.
○ Devolution introduced other key law-making bodies in the UK. Though in legal terms
these could be abolished by the UK parliament, politically this would be very unlikely
and difficult.
○ The Human Rights Act gives judges power to review legislation passed by
parliament and declare it incompatible with the act.
● Though parliament could legally theoretically reverse many of these, it is near politically
impossible, whilst there is an argument that devolution can’t even be reversed legally.
● Expert of the UK constitution Vernon Bogdanor said that parliamentary sovereignty remains
“in form, but not in substance. In practice, therefore, if not in law, parliamentary sovereignty
is no longer the governing principle of the British constitution."
○ This case has perhaps decreased since the UK left the EU, though.
The 2019 Prorogation Court Case
● On 29 August 2019, Boris Johnson prorogued (temporarily suspended) parliament.
○ Johnson and the government argued that the prorogation was a routine one that
ordinarily follows the selection of a new Prime Minister.
○ But critics argued the prorogation was intended to avoid parliamentary scrutiny of
the government’s Brexit plans and to make it harder for parliament to block a
no-deal Brexit
● The Supreme Court unanimously ruled that the prorogation was unlawful, reversing the
prorogation and reinstating parliament.
○ The Supreme Court noted that the sovereignty of parliament would be undermined
‘as the foundational principle of our constitution’ if a prerogative power to prorogue
could be used to ‘prevent Parliament from exercising its legislative authority’.
● Arguably introduced/semi-codified a new key constitutional principle as part of
parliamentary sovereignty; the accountability of the executive to parliament.
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A
Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 9
