https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover
UK Government
4 Relations Between the Branches
● 4.1 The Supreme Court and its interactions with, and influence over, the legislative
and policy-making processes.
○ The role and composition of the Supreme Court.
○ The key operating principles of the Supreme Court, including judicial
neutrality and judicial independence and their extent.
○ The degree to which the Supreme Court influences both the Executive and
Parliament, including the doctrine of ultra vires and judicial review.
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓
🗣 Key Debates 🗣
● The key debates are in relation to the extent of the Supreme Court’s neutrality and
independence, the extent to which the Supreme Court influences the government
parliament, the effectiveness of the Supreme Court at carrying out its functions and how
political the role played by the Supreme Court is.
○ You should make two essay plans on this, which you can then adapt to different,
more specific questions that will come up.
❓Past/Possible Essay Questions❓
● Evaluate the view that the Supreme Court has too much power over Parliament. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the Supreme Court has too much power over the government. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the Supreme Court has too much influence over the Executive
and Parliament. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the Supreme Court is too politicised. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the Supreme Court has strengthened parliamentary sovereignty. (30)
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 1
● Evaluate the view that the Supreme Court operates with sufficient judicial neutrality
and independence. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the Supreme Court should not exercise control over the power of
government. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the Supreme Court effectively protects rights in the UK. (30)
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover 1
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓ 1
The Creation, Role and Composition Of The Supreme Court 2
The Creation Of The Supreme Court 2
The Role Of The Supreme Court 3
📜 The Key Operating Principles Of The Supreme Court 📜 5
Judicial Neutrality 5
Judicial Independence 6
The Extent To Which The Supreme Court Influences The Executive And Parliament 9
Its Role In Relation To Human Rights 9
Judicial Review 11
Key Examples Of Judicial Review And What They Show 12
Has The Supreme Court Become Increasingly Politicised? 15
The Creation, Role and Composition Of The Supreme Court
The Creation Of The Supreme Court
How, Why and When the Supreme Court Was Created
● The Supreme Court was established by the Constitutional Reform Act of 2005 but didn't
begin work until October 2009, when it moved out of Parliament and into Middlesex
Guildhall in Parliament Square.
● The creation of the court by Tony Blair’s Labour government was designed to end the
fusion of powers at the highest level of the UK judiciary and modernise by moving towards
a separation of powers that would increase the highest court’s judicial independence and
make it clearly separate from Parliament.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 2
○ Previously the most senior judges had sat as members of the House of Lords and
were known as the ‘law lords’.
How the Creation of the Supreme Court Changed the Role of the Lord Chancellor
● Prior to the 2005 Constitutional Reform Act, the Lord Chancellor had 3 roles:
○ 1. Cabinet minister in the government who oversaw the legal system (executive).
○ 2. Chairman of sittings in the House of Lords (legislative).
○ 3. Head of the judiciary who appointed other judges (judicial).
● This was criticised for lacking independence, especially the fact that a government minister
appointed senior judges.
● As a result, the Constitutional Reform Act removed the legislative and judicial role of the
Lord Chancellor, who is now just a government minister.
○ The House of Lords is now chaired by the Lord Speaker.
○ Judges are now appointed by an independent Judicial Appointments Commission
and the judiciary is headed by the most senior member of the Supreme Court, who
is known as the ‘Lord Chief Justice’.
How the Creation of the Supreme Court Can Be Seen As Challenging Parliamentary
Sovereignty
● The creation of the Supreme Court can be seen as a challenge to parliamentary
sovereignty as the law lords in the House of Lords were no longer the UK’s final court of
appeal.
○ Further, the increased independence of the court was designed to make it more
effective in holding the government and parliament to account.
● On the other hand, though it is politically very unlikely, the Supreme Court could in theory
and legally still be abolished/reformed with a simple act of parliament, whilst unlike the US it
has no powers to strike down laws passed by Parliament.
The Role Of The Supreme Court
What Cases Does the Supreme Court Hear?
● The Supreme Court is the only UK-wide court and is the final court of appeal for rulings
made by lower courts, such as the High Court.
○ It is the final court of appeal for criminal cases in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland, and for civil cases across the whole of the UK.
● It also hears cases of public and constitutional importance, including:
○ Judging whether the government has acted ‘ultra vires’, as was the case in the 2019
Prorogation of Parliament Case.
○ Judging whether devolved bodies is Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have
acted within their powers.
○ Judging whether acts of Parliament contravene the Human Rights Act. The
Composition Of The Supreme Court.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 3
Who is on the Supreme Court?
● The Supreme Court consists of 12 members, though cases are always heard by an odd
number of justices so that a majority verdict can be reached.
○ In most cases, 5,7 or 9 justices take part, however in key cases of constitutional
importance, 11 do.
● Supreme Court judges have to have served as a senior judge for 2 years, or been a
qualified lawyer for at least 15 years.
○ The most senior member of the Supreme Court is designated as president. This is
currently Lord Robert Reed.
● Judges have to retire from the court once they reach 70 years old, at which point they enter
the House of Lords.
How the Supreme Court Is Unrepresentative
● The Supreme Court has been criticised for being highly unrepresentative in terms of race,
gender, class, education and age.
○ Even the Times, the leading newspaper of the establishment, used the phrase 'pale,
male and stale' to head an article on the judiciary in 2011.
● In terms of the current 12 justices:
○ 10/12 are male.
○ 11/12 are white.
○ 11/12 have studied at Oxbridge and the majority went to private schools.
○ 12/12 are 60 or over.
● Lady Simler, the most recent appointment in September 2023 was just the fifth woman to
be a member of the Supreme Court in history.
How Supreme Court Justices Are Chosen
● The original Supreme Court Justices were the former Law Lords, who moved from the
House of Lords to their new premises.
● Since the Constitutional Reform Act, new Supreme Court justices are nominated by an
independent 5-member Selection Commission, consisting of the president of the Court, a
member of the Judicial Appointments Commission and a member of each of the equivalent
bodies for Scotland and NI.
○ The Lord Chancellor then either confirms or rejects the nominated judge. The Lord
Chancellor can only reject a nomination 3 times, however, before they have to
choose one of the nominations.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 4
○ The appointment is then confirmed by the monarch.
📜 The Key Operating Principles Of The Supreme Court 📜
Judicial Neutrality
What is Judicial Neutrality?
● Judicial neutrality is the idea that judges will exercise their functions without being
influenced by their own personal bias or political opinions.
How Judicial Neutrality is Safeguarded in the Supreme Court
● Judges have traditionally remained largely anonymous, rarely speaking out in public and
avoiding comments on their own rulings or airing views about the government.
○ Judges, like civil servants, aren't allowed to campaign for political parties or
pressure groups.
● Judges have to base each decision in law and provide a full explanation of how they
reached it.
○ Supreme Court decisions are published in full for people to read and scrutinise,
whilst cases are televised on YouTube.
■ The court is therefore very transparent and would find it very difficult to hide
any bias.
● Supreme Court Judges' elevation to the bench is based on their past performance,
experience and the expectation they will set aside their personal views.
○ The current President of the Supreme Court Lord Robert Reed, for example, has
served as a senior judge since 1998.
● Conflicts of interest are avoided by preventing Supreme Court judges from sitting on cases
that involve family, friends and others they know personally.
How the Supreme Court’s Judicial Neutrality Has Been Questioned In Relation To Its
Composition
● The extremely narrow composition of the court in terms of gender, age, education, class
and race has led to very reasonable concerns as to how this impacts the Supreme Court’s
neutrality.
○ The court’s narrow composition leads to limited perspectives and potentially to an
inability to fully understand certain issues/the situations of certain individuals.
● Former president of the Supreme Court Lady Hale argued in 2019 that it is important the
public can look at the judiciary and see them as their judges, rather than ‘beings from
another planet’.
● The fact that the court only had one female member was significant in the case of
'Radmacher v Granatino' (2010). It was a case involving a prenuptial agreement between
marriage partners, in which a majority of the justices upheld the principle that claims made
in the event of a divorce should be limited.
○ Lady Hale was the only one of the 9 justices to dissent from the majority verdict.
She gave as her reason that the vast majority of people who would lose out as a
result of the precedent would be women and argued that it may be better for
Parliament to make such decisions where gender is a key element of the case,
rather than a very unrepresentative Supreme Court.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 5
How the Supreme Court’s Judicial Neutrality Has Been Questioned In Relation To
Brexit
● The neutrality of key courts, including the Supreme Court, has been questioned in relation
to important court cases that relate to Brexit.
○ After the High Court ruled in November 2016 that the consent of Parliament was
needed to trigger Article 50, which officially started the process of Brexit, the Daily
Mail ran the headline ‘Enemies Of The People’ with pictures of the 3 high court
judges, suggesting that they were defying democracy and the wishes of 17.4M
Brexit voters.
○ After the Supreme Court ruled in 2019 that Boris Johnson’s prorogation of
Parliament was unlawful, various right wing commentators and Johnson allies
described the Supreme Court judges as ‘arch-remainers’.
● It has therefore been suggested that Supreme Court judges were influenced by their
personal political views on Brexit, rather than being neutral.
Judicial Independence
What is Judicial Independence?
● Judicial independence is the idea that judges must be free from political interference,
particularly from the government.
○ This is especially important in ‘ultra vires’ court cases involving the state, as the
public must be confident they are receiving impartial justice under the rule of law,
whilst judges must be confident that their judgements won’t influence their job
prospects.
How Judicial Independence is Safeguarded in the Supreme Court
Security Of Tenure:
● Judges can't be removed from office unless they break the law or are impeached by a vote
in both houses of parliament.
● The only limit on their service is an official retirement age of 70, which is known as a
security of tenure.
● Like MPs in Parliament, judges are also immune from legal action arising from any
comments they may make on cases in court.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 6
Pay:
● Judges' salaries are paid automatically from an independent budget known as the
consolidation funds, which can’t be manipulated by the government.
● They are also paid well so that there is less incentive for them to be influenced by financial
pressure.
○ The current salary of Supreme Court justices is £226,193.
Appointment:
● Since the Constitutional Reform Act, new Supreme Court justices are nominated by an
independent 5-member Selection Commission, consisting of the president of the Court, a
member of the Judicial Appointments Commission and a member of each of the equivalent
bodies for Scotland and NI.
○ The Lord Chancellor then either confirms or rejects the nominated judge. The Lord
Chancellor can only reject a nomination 3 times, however, before they have to
choose one of the nominations.
○ The appointment is then confirmed by the monarch.
● Especially in comparison to the previous system, under which the Lord Chancellor would
appoint judges, this system is therefore free from government influence, very transparent
and depoliticised.
Physical Separation From Parliament:
● The fact that the Supreme Court is physically separate from parliament is another, more
visible sign of its independence.
● There was never any suggestion that the Law Lords were subject to government pressure,
with a number of cases in which they showed their independence.
● However, the transfer of the Supreme Court to separate premises has removed any
possible doubt of this.
Sub Judice Rules:
● Sub judice rules prevent members of parliament, government ministers and the media from
publicly speaking about impending or ongoing legal proceedings.
○ This is intended to prevent the media and politicians from influencing the outcome of
court cases.
How Recent Actions of the Media and Politicians Challenge the Independence of the
Supreme Court
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 7
● Especially surrounding two key cases in relation to Brexit (the Article 50 case and the
Prorogation case), the work of the Supreme Court has become increasingly high profile and
politicised in recent years.
● Supreme Court justices are no longer as anonymous as they used to be, whilst various
parts of the media and politicians, including government ministers, have commented on and
criticised the decisions of the court.
● This can be seen as posing a challenge both to the independence of the court and to its
image as an institution that impartially administers justice.
Conservative Criticism Of The Supreme Court In Relation To Rwanda Plan:
● The Supreme Court’s ruling that the Rwanda plan was illegal under domestic and
international law led to criticism from key members of the Conservative Party.
○ Sunak criticised the ruling in the media, with his rhetoric presenting the court as
interfering in policy, with the implication of judicial overreach.
○ Even though he knows full well the court isn’t a foreign court, he said in the wake of
the ruling “I’ve also been clear that I won’t allow a foreign court to block us from
flights taking off. My patience is worn thin, the British people’s patience is worn thin.”
● Braverman challenged the judgement in court, saying she disagreed with it, and had
previously criticised the Supreme Court for judicial overreach, arguing that there had been
a “huge increase in political litigation”.
● There is significant concern that ministers attacking judges over their decisions and
criticising the courts puts undue pressure on the court, flouting sub judice rules and making
it more difficult for the court to act neutrally.
Starmer And Badenoch Threaten Judicial Independence With Comments At PMQs:
● In 2025 Lady Sue Carr, the head of the judiciary and Lady Chief Justice wrote to the
Government and the Opposition expressing concern regarding safeguarding the
independence of judicial decisions in response to comments made during PMQs in 2025.
● Starmer agreed in a question that a decision regarding the resettlement of a Gazan family
in the UK was a "completely wrong" decision, stating that it should be Parliament, not
judges, making the rules on immigration.
○ Additionally, he said the Home Secretary would act to close a "legal loophole" to
alter rulings by narrowing the human right to a family life in article 8 of the ECHR.
○ This shows how the government can use secondary or primary legislation to change
the law if they disagree with how judges are interpreting it, asserting the power of
the Government over the Judiciary.
● This follows the trend of senior judges being directly criticised by politicians, particularly
since the Supreme Court's interventions on Brexit and the Rwanda Scheme.
● The Lady Chief Justice said that the Government failed to visibly respect and protect the
independence of the judiciary, and any dissent should be made through the appellate
process not verbal attacks to protect the rule of law.
○ This threatens Judicial Independence - the idea that judges must be free from
political interference, as decisions should be impartial justice under the rule of law.
○ Government ministers, especially the Prime Minister, commenting on and criticising
decisions of the court threatens both the independence of decisions and its image
as an institution which impartially administers justice.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 8
The Extent To Which The Supreme Court Influences The
Executive And Parliament
Its Role In Relation To Human Rights
What Role Does the Supreme Court Play in Relation to the Human Rights Act?
● The Supreme Court plays an important role in ensuring that all legislation passed by
Parliament is compliant with the Human Rights Act (which is the European Convention on
Human Rights but in UK law).
● Though the ECHR and HRA aren’t legally superior to statute laws, the Supreme Court can
declare acts of parliament incompatible with the Human Rights Act and urge Parliament to
change them.
The Debate Over the Extent Of This Power
Arguments that the Supreme Court has limited influence over the Executive and Parliament in
relation to the Human Rights Act:
● Whilst the Supreme Court can issue a declaration of incompatibility in relation to the Human
Rights Act, they have no legal powers to compel parliament and the government to change
the offending Act of Parliament due to Parliament being sovereign.
○ The Illegal Migration Bill, for example, was introduced by Home Secretary Suella
Braverman on 7th March 2023 with a section 19 note stating that there was a
likelihood the provisions of the bill would be incompatible with the Human Rights Act
and international law (The European Convention on Human Rights), but that the
government wanted to proceed with it nonetheless.
■ A similar note was included when the Safety of Rwanda Bill was introduced.
● Further, the Human Rights Act could easily be repealed/changed by a simple Act of
Parliament.
○ This power is therefore far from secure.
Arguments that the Supreme Court has significant influence over the Executive and Parliament
in relation to the Human Rights Act:
● Whilst the Supreme Court can’t legally compel Parliament to make any changes to laws,
Parliament usually acts to address any declarations of incompatibility raised by the courts
and parliament also has a Joint Committee on Human Rights to scrutinise bills and ensure
they are compatible, therefore demonstrating the 'persuasive influence' of the HRA.
○ For example, in A v Secretary of State for the Home Department, part of The
Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 was declared incompatible with Articles
5 and 14 of the human rights act by permitting the detention of suspected
international terrorists in a way that discriminated on the grounds of nationality or
immigration status.
○ The Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005 was introduced by Parliament to amend the
legislation as a result, bringing UK legislation in line with the HRA.
○ More recently, in R (Steinfeld and Keiden) v Secretary of State for International
Development in 2018, the Civil Partnership Act 2004 was declared incompatible
with articles 14 and 8 of the Human Rights Act as they precluded different sex
couples from entering civil partnerships. The legislation was then amended in 2019
in the Civil Partnerships, Marriages and Deaths Act.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 9
The Supreme Court Ruling That The Rwanda Plan Is Unlawful And The Safety Of
Rwanda Act:
Initial Act and Agreement
The UK government originally formed a migration partnership with Rwanda in April 2022, intending
to relocate asylum seekers who arrived in the UK illegally to Rwanda where their asylum claims
would be processed. This was part of a broader effort to deter illegal crossings and dismantle
human trafficking networks
Supreme Court Ruling
This arrangement faced significant legal hurdles, culminating in a November 2023 ruling by the UK
Supreme Court. The court found the policy unlawful, citing risks of refoulement (the act of forcibly
returning refugees or asylum seekers to a country where they are likely to face persecution) and
inadequacies in Rwanda's asylum system as major concerns. They argued that as a result, the
policy was against the Human Rights Act and the 1951 Refugee Convention, as Rwanda couldn’t
be defined as a ‘safe country’.
The government challenged the ruling in AAA v The Secretary of State for the Home Department,
but the Supreme Court upheld the ruling that the plan was against domestic and international law.
Importantly, as they were ruling against a policy rather than a law, their ruling stopped the policy as
it was illegal, rather than it being a decleartion of incompatibility in relation to legislation, which is
non-binding.
New Agreement and Legislative Response
In response to the Supreme Court's concerns, the UK and Rwanda drafted a new treaty, signed in
December 2023, which included more robust guarantees regarding the treatment of transferred
individuals. This treaty aimed to enhance the procedural safeguards within Rwanda's asylum
process, including better training for decision-makers and a stronger monitoring framework.
Safety of Rwanda Act
To address the legal issues identified by the Supreme Court, the UK government introduced the
Safety of Rwanda (Asylum and Immigration) Bill. This legislation, which received Royal Assent in
April 2024, states that Rwanda must be considered a safe country for asylum seekers and that
international law must be put aside to allow for the deportation of asylum seekers to Rwanda,
therefore removing the individual right to judicial review on these grounds.
As with the Illegal Migration Act, it was introduced with a section 19 note stating that the bill is not
compatible with the Human Rights Act/European Convention On Human Rights, but it would like to
proceed anyway. It also gives ministers the power to ignore emergency rulings against the act by
the European Court Of Human Rights in Strasbourg. The Joint Committee On Human Rights in
Parliament found the bill ‘fundamentally incompatible’ with the UK’s human rights obligations.
● On the one hand, it can be argued that this shows how the Supreme Court can protect
rights effectively in the UK, as its ruling led the government to secure additional guarantees
and a new treaty with Rwanda.
● On the other hand, it can be argued that they have limited power if the government and
parliament is intent on an action/policy that threatens rights in the UK. This is because the
government, rather than changing to a different policy that was legal, changed the law to
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 10
make their policy consistent with domestic law (rather than the policy itself), whilst stating in
that law that international law should not be implemented in this case.
● This shows that the Supreme Court can only protect rights if the law does and that
parliament can change the law to make their policy legal if the Supreme Court declares it
illegal.
Judicial Review
How the Supreme Court’s Judicial Review Powers Allow It To Declare The Actions
Of Government ‘Ultra Vires’
● The Supreme Court has the power to ensure that the government hasn’t acted beyond the
authority given to them by the law in ‘ultra vires’ cases.
○ ‘Ultra Vires’ means ‘beyond the law’.
● This can be by stretching secondary legislation too far, or by doing something that breaks
primary legislation.
● If the government is judged to have acted ‘ultra vires’, the Supreme Court can sanction the
government or force them to reverse their action.
○ The Supreme Court can therefore strike down secondary legislation.
○ The Supreme Court can also strike down laws passed by devolved bodies.
How This Can Be On Issues Of Constitutional Importance
● The significance of judicial review can be exaggerated, as the majority of cases are in
relation to local authorities, rather than government ministers, whilst only 10% against the
government manage to win.
● Some ‘ultra vires’ cases are of great constitutional importance, though, such as in the 2019
prorogation case where the Supreme Court was adjudicating on the relative powers of
Parliament and the Government and in cases where the court decides whether power over
a particular policy area is held by the UK Parliament or by the devolved body.
How the Supreme Court Used To Have Greater Powers When the UK was in the EU
● When the UK was a member of the European Union, the Supreme Court had greater
powers over Parliament and the Government because it could strike down laws passed by
Parliament or the actions of government when either branch had breached EU law, which
was higher law.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 11
Key Examples Of Judicial Review And What They Show
The 2019 Prorogation Case (Miller v The Prime Minister)
● On 29 August 2019, Boris Johnson prorogued (temporarily suspended) parliament.
○ Johnson and the government argued that the prorogation was a routine one that
ordinarily follows the selection of a new Prime Minister.
○ But critics argued the prorogation was intended to avoid parliamentary scrutiny of
the government’s Brexit plans and to make it harder for parliament to block a
no-deal Brexit
● The Supreme Court unanimously ruled that the prorogation was unlawful, reversing the
prorogation and reinstating parliament.
○ The Supreme Court noted that the sovereignty of parliament would be undermined
‘as the foundational principle of our constitution’ if a prerogative power to prorogue
could be used to ‘prevent Parliament from exercising its legislative authority’.
● This shows how the Supreme Court was able to check the power of the government and
uphold parliamentary sovereignty and the power of parliament to scrutinise the government.
The Dissolution and Calling of Parliament Act 2022:
● The Dissolution and Calling of Parliament Act 2022, which was introduced to repeal the
Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011, also included an ouster clause, which explicitly removed
the Supreme Court’s power of judicial review in relation to the dissolution of Parliament.
○ The law states that a court cannot question the exercise of the Prime Minister’s
power to dissolve Parliament or the limit or extent of these powers. They are
‘non-justiciable’.
● This can be seen as a direct response to the Supreme Court’s 2019 decision (in the ‘Miller
2’ case) to reverse the government’s prorogation of Parliament, ensuring that judicial review
in relation to this power can’t happen again.
○ This shows the limits of the Supreme Court’s power, as Parliament can pass laws to
limit the Supreme Court’s power and change the law if they don’t like how it is being
implemented.
The 2016 Article 50 Case (Miller v Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union)
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 12
● Gina Miller argued that the government couldn't give notice of Britain's intention to leave the
European Union under Article 50 without parliament giving its approval.
○ The government disagreed and argued it could use its executive powers to make or
unmake treaties with foreign governments.
● By an 8-3 majority, the court decided against the government, arguing the process of
leaving the EU would involve the removal of rights conferred by parliament (passing the
1972 European Communities Act) and that parliament should therefore have to give its
consent.
○ The case also ruled that the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish Parliaments had no
rights to veto an Act of Parliament giving consent to Article 50.
● This therefore also shows how the Supreme Court is able to check the power of the
executive and uphold parliamentary sovereignty.
The 2022 Second Referendum On Scottish Independence Case
● The uncodified nature of the UK constitution led to it not being clear who can legislate for
an independence referendum in Scotland.
○ Parliamentary sovereignty is important, but often disputed in relation to Scotland,
especially as it is seen to compete with the popular sovereignty of the Scottish
people.
● The first (2014) independence referendum was legislated for by a special agreement
between the UK and Scottish Governments (the Edinburgh Agreement), which was then
approved by the UK Parliament.
○ There was no such agreement for a second independence referendum, with the UK
parliament and government not consenting to one. The Scottish Government
nonetheless sought to argue that it could legislate for a referendum itself under the
Scotland Act, arguing that this power wasn’t reserved to the UK Parliament.
● In November 2022, the UK Supreme Court ruled that the Scotland Act (1998) doesn’t give
the Scottish Parliament the power to unilaterally legislate for an independence referendum.
○ Instead, it is a reserved power of the UK Parliament; ‘the Union of the Kingdoms of
Scotland and England’ is reserved.
○ Nicola Sturgeon and the Scottish Government accepted the judgement.
● This shows the power of the UK Supreme Court to clarify the powers of different parts of
the UK political system, particularly devolved bodies. It also shows how the Supreme Court
can uphold the power of the UK Parliament and UK Government against devolved bodies.
For Women Scotland Ltd v The Scottish Ministers (2025)
● On the 16th of April 2025, the UK Supreme Court ruled that the legal definition of a ‘woman’
in the Equality Act (2010) was based on biological sex in For Women Scotland Ltd v The
Scottish Ministers (2025).
● Pressure group ForWomenScotland challenged the Scottish Government's implementation
of the Gender Representation on Public Boards (Scotland) Act (2018).
○ They argued that the legislation was unlawful as it changed the meaning of “sex”
outlined in the Equality Act (2010) by including transgender people with Gender
Recognition Certificates in their definition of sex.
○ The role of the court was to clarify the interpretation of the words “sex” and “woman”
in the Equality Act (2010).
● The court ruled the Scottish Parliament did not have the legal authority to redefine terms in
a UK wide law.
○ This shows that the Supreme Court plays a key role in settling disputes between
Westminster and Devolved bodies, and how it can strike down legislation passed by
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 13
the devolved bodies, even though it can’t strike down legislation passed by the UK
Parliament due to parliamentary sovereignty.
The 2014 Agricultural Sector Wales Bill Case
● The UK government argued that the ‘Agricultural Sector Wales’ bill introduced by the Welsh
Assembly, which set up an advisory committee on agricultural wages, was outside the
policy competence of the Welsh Assembly and therefore ‘ultra vires’.
○ The UK government claimed that this committee related to employment and
industrial relations which weren’t devolved and were still controlled by the UK
government, rather than agriculture, which was devolved.
● The Supreme Court sided with the Welsh Assembly and ruled that the Assembly hadn’t
acted ‘ultra vires’, citing the 2006 Government of Wales act.
● This shows how the Supreme Court clarifies the powers of devolved bodies and how it can
uphold the power of devolved bodies against the UK Parliament and Government.
The 2014 'HS2 Action Alliance Limited v Secretary of State for Transport' Case
● Environmental campaigners sought a judicial review on whether the government’s HS2
plans complied with European Union environmental directives.
● The Supreme Court unanimously dismissed the appeal, ruling that the merits of the scheme
remained open to debate until Parliament had reached a decision about it.
○ The Supreme Court rejected the idea that courts should monitor parliamentary
debates, arguing that it was contrary to the long-established principle of the UK
constitution that judges shouldn’t interfere with the work of Parliament.
● This therefore shows how the Supreme Court can uphold democracy and the power of
Parliament and the Government by being careful about which cases it selects and not
seeking to extend its own power.
The 2015 ‘Black Spider Memos’ Case
● In 2015, journalist Rob Evans argued that the government had to release the letters and
memos sent by then Prince Charles to government ministers, because they were obliged to
under the Freedom Of Information Act.
○ The government, however, resisted releasing them and argued they were sensitive
and private documents.
● The Supreme Court ruled by a majority of 5-2 in favour of Evans.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 14
● This shows how the Supreme Court can prevent the government breaking the law and
uphold the rights of UK citizens.
The December 2024 Jackdaw and Rosebank Oil and Gas Case:
● In December 2024, the UK Supreme Court ruled that the previous Conservative
Government had broken the law in 2023 and 2024, when it approved new oil and gas
projects Jackdaw and Rosebank without properly considering the environmental impact.
○ The fact that the government didn’t consider the environmental impact of scope 3
emissions (when the oil and gas is burned), meant that they broke the the Climate
Change Act 2008, which requires the government to assess the full environmental
consequences of major projects.
● This decision revoked the approvals for the project until the new government approved
them again whilst properly considering the full environmental consequences of the projects.
○ This is a clear example of the Supreme Court’s power of judicial review; where the
Supreme Court can review the legality of government actions/decisions and reverse
them to ensure that the government doesn’t break laws passed by Parliament.
Has The Supreme Court Become Increasingly Politicised?
What Arguments Are There That the Supreme Court Has Too Much Political Power?
● The power of the Supreme Court to interpret the law and judge whether individuals and
public bodies, including the government, have broken it can be seen as a quasi-legislative
function that grants them a lot of power.
○ There is particular anxiety about this because the Supreme Court is unelected,
unaccountable and unrepresentative, yet has the power to hold to account and
challenge the government and parliament, which are elected, accountable and more
representative.
● On the other hand, it can be argued that this is unavoidable as long as they are asked to
carry out the law and that the court is a politically neutral and independent body which plays
a key role in upholding democracy and the rule of law in the United Kingdom.
What Arguments are There That the Supreme Court has Become Increasingly
Politicised?
● The power of the Supreme Court to issue declarations of incompatibility with the Human
Rights Act draws it into the political fray, asking the court to judge the merits of legislation
passed by parliament rather than simply ensuring this legislation is effectively implemented.
● Recent high profile Supreme Court cases on Brexit and Scottish Independence have made
the court more high profile and politicised, with judges no longer as anonymous as they
used to be and politicians and the media commenting on the decisions of the court.
○ This has been partly facilitated by the fact that, since the 2005 Constitutional
Reform Act, the Supreme Court is more visible and separate from Parliament.
● Some have argued that the decisions in the Article 50 and Prorogation cases were
examples of the Supreme Court interfering too much in politics and limiting the actions of a
democratically elected government.
What Arguments are There That the Supreme Court Hasn’t Become Increasingly
Politicised?
● Since the Constitutional Reform Act, the appointments process is a lot more transparent
and less open to political interference.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 15
○ Further, it can be argued that the neutrality and independence of the Supreme Court
are well protected by: the court’s security of tenure, pay, sub judice rules, physical
separation from parliament, avoidance of conflicts of interest and the downgrading
of the role of the Lord Chancellor.
● Since the UK has left the EU, The Supreme Court now has no powers to strike down laws
passed by Parliament.
● It can be argued that the conflict between the Supreme Court and the government is not
due to the court trying to extend its political role and wade into politics, but because the
government has increasingly sought to act ‘ultra vires’.
○ The Supreme Court has simply continued to implement the law and protect the
rights of individuals and the sovereignty of Parliament.
○ Further, in other cases, such as the case on a Second Referendum On Scottish
Independence, the court has upheld the power of the UK government and
Parliament against other bodies.
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A
Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 16
