Evaluate The View That The Changing Nature Of The World Order Has Undermined Efforts To Reduce Conflict, Poverty and Environmental Damage. (30) Politics Explained Essay
Plan
Topic ➡ 4. Power and Developments
Structure ➡ Three paragraphs with for/against and an overall judgement within each
This Essay Plan Is Part Of A Package Of Essay Plans Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here ➡
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These are long plans as theyʼre intended to be revised from to cover the key
content you need to know for the exam. In the exam, you would need to adapt them for the
specific question you are asked and you certainly wouldnʼt need to include everything,
especially not all of the examples. The judgements are also subjective and you donʼt have to
agree with them!
Introduction
Key Definitions
‘The changing nature of the world orderʼ in this essay is interpreted as the rise of China and
other great powers in the past decade which have created a more multipolar world order and
challenged US hegemony.
Paragraph One ➡ Conflict
For: The Changing Nature Of The World Order Has Undermined Efforts To
Reduce ConflictEvaluate The View That The Changing Nature Of The World Order Has Undermined Efforts To Reduce Conflict, Poverty and Environmental Damage.
30 Politics Explained Essay Plan1
There is a strong argument to suggest that the changing nature of the world order has
undermined efforts to reduce conflict, as the shift to a more multipolar world has led to greater
competition among major powers, which has increased the number of regional conflicts.
While the US dominated militarily during its unipolar moment and this made other states more
wary of starting conflict, today, countries such as Russia and China have become more
assertive in their regions.
Russiaʼs interventions in Georgia 2008 and Ukraine 2014, 2022 reflect its determination
to challenge NATOʼs influence in Eastern Europe.
Similarly, Chinaʼs assertiveness in the South China Sea, including my building artificial
islands to be military bases, has heightened tensions with neighbouring countries and the
US, contributing to regional instability.
Further, since the reelection of Trump, the U.S. has shown a willingness to flout international
law and threaten to use hard power when itʼs in its geopolitical interest, such as through
threatening to militarily seize Greenland and use military power to remove Chinese influence
in the Panama Canal.
The rise of competing powers has also undermined efforts to reduce conflict, as there has been
an increase in proxy conflicts and a decline in conflict mediation as a result.
Under US hegemony, the US played a leading role in mediating conflicts and enforcing
peace agreements, as seen in the Balkans in the 1990s.
However, the current contested balance of power has made global conflict resolution more
complex. Many of the worldʼs conflicts have had significant powers on either side, such as
in Syria where the US, Russia, and Iran were all involved, making diplomatic resolutions
harder to achieve.
Similarly, diplomatic efforts to end the Israel-Hamas war have been undermined by the
fact that Iran and the United States have been supporting either side of the conflict
financially and militarily.
Furthermore, the Thucydides Trap theory suggests that the continued rise of China will likely
lead to greater global conflict between the United States and China.
The theory, popularised by political scientist Graham Allison, suggests that when a rising
power threatens to displace an established hegemon, the likelihood of conflict increases
dramatically, due to fear and miscalculation between the rising power and established
hegemon
Against: The Changing Nature Of The World Order Hasnʼt Undermined Efforts
To Reduce Conflict
On the other hand, it can be argued that the changing nature of the world order hasnʼt
undermined efforts to reduce conflict, as it has stopped the United States using its military
power without real checks.
During the unipolar period after the Cold War, the US frequently acted alone in military
interventions, most notably in the 2003 Iraq War. The war was launched without broad
international support, but the US decided to ignore international law and pursue it anyway,
recognising its global hegemonic power.Evaluate The View That The Changing Nature Of The World Order Has Undermined Efforts To Reduce Conflict, Poverty and Environmental Damage.
30 Politics Explained Essay Plan2
In the current multipolar world, the US has become more cautious about acting unilaterally.
The rise of powers like Russia and China means that US interventions are more likely to face
resistance or counterbalancing actions, as seen in Syria.
This shift has also been accompanied by a broader move toward isolationism in recent
years, particularly under the Trump administrationʼs “America Firstˮ policy, which
prioritises domestic issues over global military engagements.
As a result, the US has scaled back its involvement in conflicts like Syria and
Afghanistan and it can be argued that this changing world order means that conflict is
now less likely.
Further, a liberal perspective would suggest that power transitions in the global order will not
lead to conflict due to economic interdependence and how closely interlinked economies are
under globalisation.
The economic cost of war between China and the US would be extremely high and this will
prevent war as a result.
Further, liberals argue that institutions like the United Nations and World Trade Organisation
WTO provide frameworks for cooperation that reduce the likelihood of war by promoting
interdependence and dialogue.
Judgement
Overall, it is clear that the changing nature of the world order over the past decade has not
reduced conflict, but instead significantly increased it and will likely continue to do so despite
close economic links between great powers.
Though US hegemony did lead to conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan as it was able to pursue its
aims without real challenge, the current multipolar world order creates more conflict in different
parts of the world as a range of different states with growing power pursue their regional
interests and are empowered to do so due to the USʼ declining relative power and unwillingness
to be the world's policeman.
Paragraph Two ➡ Poverty
For: The Changing Nature Of The World Order Has Undermined Efforts To
Reduce Poverty
There is a strong argument to suggest that the changing nature of the world order has
undermined efforts to reduce poverty globally, as the contest for influence between great
powers has weakened coordinated efforts to address global poverty.
Organisations like the World Bank and IMF, dominated by the US and Western allies, used to
be the main players in international efforts to reduce poverty and prevent developing
economies from collapsing. However, they now face competition from the Belt and Road
Initiative BRI and institutions like the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank AIIB.
This fragmentation reduces the cohesion of international efforts to alleviate poverty, as
countries receiving aid or loans often find themselves caught between competing
geopolitical interests.
Further, as great power competition has grown in a more multipolar world order, great powers
are arguably prioritising their strategic and economic interests in developing countries, ratherEvaluate The View That The Changing Nature Of The World Order Has Undermined Efforts To Reduce Conflict, Poverty and Environmental Damage.
30 Politics Explained Essay Plan3
than solely focusing on poverty reduction.
For example, many of Chinaʼs infrastructure projects involved in the Belt and Road Initiative
have led to it being accused of ‘dept-trap diplomacyʼ, where it gains strategic influence after
countries struggle to repay their loans, such as with Sri Lankaʼs Hambantota Port.
This has undermined Chinaʼs global reputation as it has been accused of exploiting
countriesʼ poverty and dependence for its own interests.
Further, the escalation in protectionism driven by Trump in his second term is likely to harm
global efforts to reduce poverty, as the 10% tariffs placed on all U.S. imports and much
higher tariffs placed on China will inevitably lead to reduced global trade and therefore harm
global economic growth.
Against: The Changing Nature Of The World Order Hasnʼt Undermined Efforts
To Reduce Poverty
On the other hand, it can be argued that the changing nature of the world order has in fact
improved global efforts to reduce poverty, as there are a number of competing states and
economic models, which gives poorer states more choice and opportunity.
Under US hegemony, the neoliberal model, emphasising free markets, was the dominant
approach and much-needed financial assistance from the IMF and World Bank was often
made conditional on implementing austerity measures.
This was often disastrous and resulted in significant increases in poverty, rather than a
reduction. In line with dependency theory, it entrenched African nationsʼ position in
exploitative global economic structures, forcing them to remain dependent on exporting
raw materials while importing expensive manufactured goods.
In Nigeria, for example, IMF imposed conditions led to privatisation, deregulation,
and devaluation of the currency in 1986. These reforms caused inflation to rise,
public services to deteriorate, and living standards to decline, particularly for the
poor.
By the early 1990s, poverty had increased from 28% to 66%, as real wages fell and
the cost of living soared, making essential goods unaffordable for many.
Rather than being forced to accept these conditions as Western institutions were the only
lenders of last resort, the changing world order means that developing countries can now
access loans from the Chinese-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank AIIB and decide
which loan conditions to take.
Further, the changing world order has arguably also reduced poverty, as developing countries
can learn from Chinaʼs state-managed capitalist model, which has lifted hundreds of millions
out of poverty, rather than seeking to implement neoliberal reforms which have repeatedly
failed.
For example, Ethiopia has adopted aspects of Chinaʼs development strategy, focusing on
large-scale infrastructure projects like the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam and expanding
industrial parks to boost manufacturing.
By emulating Chinaʼs state-led investments, Ethiopia achieved rapid economic growth and
saw its poverty rate fall from 44% in 2000 to about 23% in recent years.
JudgementEvaluate The View That The Changing Nature Of The World Order Has Undermined Efforts To Reduce Conflict, Poverty and Environmental Damage.
30 Politics Explained Essay Plan4
Overall, the more persuasive argument is that the changing nature of the world order has
reduced poverty. Developing states are now able to access financial assistance from a range of
different bodies, therefore allowing them to choose the most favourable conditions.
Further, China's economic growth and intention to spread its economic model across the world
has given developing states an alternative economic model to free-market capitalism in order to
reduce poverty; state managed capitalism.
Paragraph Three ➡ Environmental Damage
For: The Changing Nature Of The World Order Has Undermined Efforts To
Reduce Environmental Damage
It can be argued that the changing nature of the world order has undermined efforts to reduce
environmental damage, as addressing climate change has become more difficult in a multipolar
world.
The US played a key role in the establishment of the Paris Agreement in 2015, but its
subsequent withdrawal under President Trump and the fragmented leadership among
global powers have undermined progress on climate action.
This lack of US hegemony has made it more difficult to implement and enforce ambitious
environmental targets and binding agreements on emissions reductions.
There have been agreements and commitments, but they have been consistently
missed, demonstrating the realist perspective that international governmental
institutions IGOs) and agreements have little real power to compel state behaviour.
Crucial to this has been the increasingly competitive world order, which has compelled states to
prioritise their own economic growth over reducing their carbon emissions, which has damaged
climate change.
China and India, as major polluters, have committed to addressing climate change but have
prioritised economic growth, recognising it is necessary to increase their power and
challenge US hegemony.
Similarly, developed countries have been unwilling to accept the burden of tackling climate
change as doing so would harm their economies and power.
For example, in 2009 developed countries pledged to provide $100 billion annually to
support developing nations in mitigating and adapting to the impacts of climate change
by 2022, however this target was consistently missed and only met in 2022 despite
being reaffirmed and conferences such as COP26 in 2021.
The influence of the more competitive world order on the environment can be seen in the
competition between the U.S. and Russia over the Arctic, in particular due to the potential for
fossil fuel reserves. This shows how states continue to see fossil fuels as key in a world where
there increasing competition and major states need to guarantee their own economic security.
Against: The Changing Nature Of The World Order Hasnʼt Undermined Efforts
To Reduce Environmental Damage
On the other hand, it can be argued that the changing nature of the world order has instead
improved efforts to reduce environmental damages and tackle climate change, as competition
among powers in a more multipolar world has spurred innovations in green technology.Evaluate The View That The Changing Nature Of The World Order Has Undermined Efforts To Reduce Conflict, Poverty and Environmental Damage.
30 Politics Explained Essay Plan5
China, for example, has recognised the geopolitical importance of renewable energy and has
become a global leader, investing heavily in solar, wind, and electric vehicle technologies.
China currently manufactures over 80% of the worldʼs solar panels and has the largest
installed capacity of both wind and solar power, producing more renewable energy than any
other country.
In addition, China dominates the electric vehicle market, accounting for over half of global
EV sales in 2024 and controlling a substantial share of the global supply chain for critical EV
battery components like lithium and cobalt.
The European Union, too, has maintained a strong leadership role on climate change, pushing
for ambitious goals like carbon neutrality by 2050.
These initiatives indicate that, although global cooperation has weakened under a more
competitive and multipolar world order, regional efforts and technological competition may still
drive progress on reducing environmental damage.
Judgement
On balance, the changing nature of the world order has reduced the effectiveness of global
efforts to reduce environmental damage. With greater competition for global power and no
global hegemon to enforce its will like in the 1990s, states are likely to prioritise economic
growth in order to maximise their power, which will continue to worsen climate change.
Overall Argument
In conclusion, the changing nature of the world order has reduced poverty, but has increased
conflict and environmental damage.
The rise of China has given developing countries a clear blueprint to reduce poverty; engage
with global trade and grow carefully through state-managed capitalism.
In relation to conflict and environmental damage, however, the shift to a multipolar world order
will only increase them as states seek to maximise their power and pursue their interests
through growing their economies and asserting military power in their regional spheres of
influence.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting
This Plan To Answer
Evaluate the view that multipolarity encourages peace and stability in the international order.
30
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedEvaluate The View That The Changing Nature Of The World Order Has Undermined Efforts To Reduce Conflict, Poverty and Environmental Damage.
30 Politics Explained Essay Plan6
Evaluate The View That The Changing Nature Of The World Order Has Undermined Efforts To Reduce Conflict, Poverty and Environmental Damage.
30 Politics Explained Essay Plan7
