Evaluate The View That Regional Organisations Other Than The EU Have Been Successful And That This Will Lead To Further Integration. (30)
Politics Explained Essay Plan
Topic ➡ 5. Regionalism and the EU
Structure ➡ Three paragraphs with for/against and an overall judgement within each
This Essay Plan Is Part Of A Package Of Essay Plans Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here ➡
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These are long plans as theyʼre intended to be revised from to cover the key
content you need to know for the exam. In the exam, you would need to adapt them for the
specific question you are asked and you certainly wouldnʼt need to include everything,
especially not all of the examples. The judgements are also subjective and you donʼt have to
agree with them!
Introduction
Key Definitions
Paragraph One ➡ Economic Regionalism
For: Regional Organisations Have Been Successful And This Will Lead To
Further Integration
The clearest way that regional organisations have been successful is in relation to economic
regionalism, where economic cooperation and integration has boosted economic growth and
protection in a number of different regional organisations across the globe.
ASEAN has had the most success of all in driving economic growth for its members. The
ASEAN Free Trade Area, established in 1992, reduced tariffs on intra-ASEAN trade to near zeroEvaluate The View That Regional Organisations Other Than The EU Have Been Successful And That This Will Lead To Further Integration. 30 Politics
Explained Essay Plan1
and significantly increased trade between ASEAN countries as a result, with intra-ASEAN trade
reaching over $800 billion in 2022.
Further, ASEAN has also been able to secure significant trade agreements with other
countries to boost ASEANʼs exports. For example, The Regional Comprehensive Economic
Partnership RCEP was signed with China, Japan and other key trading partners in 2020
and is projected to increase trade for countries in the agreement by 10.4% annually.
The Arab League is also a successful example of economic regionalism, especially since the
implementation of the Greater Arab Free Trade Area GAFTA in 1997, which has significantly
boosted intra-Arab trade by eliminating tariffs on almost all goods traded between member
states.
Intra-Arab trade grew from approximately $15 billion in 1997 to over $120 billion in recent
years. Arab League states have been able to benefit significantly, such as Jordan. Jordanʼs
exports to other Arab League countries have grown significantly since GAFTAʼs
implementation, increasing by over 300%, from approximately $500 million in the late 1990s
to over $2 billion today.
Regional organisations have therefore been successful in promoting economic growth and it is
highly likely that this will lead to further economic integration across the world, with the benefits
to regional organisations being clear.
In fact, this can already be seen in the African Unionʼs Continental Free Trade Area, which
has only been operational since 2021 and seeks to replicate the success of other
organisations and promote economic growth by reducing tariffs and harmonising trade
policies.
With participation from 54 of the AUʼs 55 member nations, AfCFTA has the potential to
boost intra-African trade by over 50%, providing a pathway for Africa to develop greater
economic independence.
Another important reason why there will likely be further economic regionalism is that it is very
effective in protecting small countriesʼ economies in a global economy dominated by USChina
competition.
In a globalised economy, smaller countries are vulnerable to exploitation by larger
economies that dictate the rules of trade and investment.
Economic regionalism addresses this imbalance, though, by allowing smaller countries to
unite as a bloc, significantly amplifying their collective bargaining power and influence on
the global stage.
ASEAN in particular has been successful in using its collective economic weight to
maintain favourable trade partnerships with both the US and China but not to be
dictated to by either.
This was clear in April 2025, where it issued a joint statement in response to Trumpʼs
tariffs and pursued a unified strategy.
Against: Regional Organisations Havenʼt Been Successful And There Wonʼt Be
Further Integration
On the other hand, it can be argued that regional organisations other than the EU havenʼt been
successful economically, as they still face difficulties in reducing all trade barriers and thereforeEvaluate The View That Regional Organisations Other Than The EU Have Been Successful And That This Will Lead To Further Integration. 30 Politics
Explained Essay Plan2
arenʼt as economically integrated as the European Union.
Despite the promise of AfCFTA, economic integration within the African Union remains slow
and faces numerous challenges. Many African countries lack the infrastructure, customs
capacity, and regulatory systems needed to support seamless cross-border trade, limiting
the positive impact of AfCFTA on economic growth.
The COVID19 pandemic further delayed implementation, as member states focused on
handling the immediate health crisis and its economic effects.
ASEAN and the Arab League also face challenges in removing all barriers to trade,
especially non-tariff barriers and regulatory differences.
These challenges have slowed the realisation of a fully integrated ASEAN Economic
Community, limiting its ability to function as a unified economic bloc.
For example, Indonesia and Thailand impose unique labelling and certification
standards on certain food products, creating extra compliance costs for exporters
within ASEAN.
Intra-Arab trade has also been hindered by differing customs regulations across
member states, which can result in lengthy customs clearance times, with goods often
delayed by days or even weeks at border crossings.
For example, Egyptian exporters face challenges with Algeriaʼs stringent
documentation requirements and differing standards for imported goods.
It can also be argued that there wonʼt be further economic integration within these regional
organisations, as they are all intergovernmental organisations that resist further political
integration and further integration may be undermined by disputes between countries, driven
by the rise of populism.
The EUʼs much more integrated economy requires a level of supranational governance over
monetary policy by the European Central Bank ECB and over trade policy by the European
Commission. As the Arab League, ASEAN and the African Union are intergovernmental
organisations that have been reluctant and have been reluctant to move away from this, it
will likely hinder further integration.
The replacement of North American Free Trade Agreement with the United States-Mexico-
Canada Agreement USMCA also shows how populism within member states can lead to a
backlash against free trade areas.
Trumpʼs first administration criticised NAFTA for disadvantaging US workers and
incentivising outsourcing to Mexico. As a result, he replaced it with the USMCA which
introduced greater barriers to trade, such as requiring that 75% of auto content be
sourced within North America.
This populist backlash against free trade may affect other regional organisations and
prevent further economic integration.
Judgement
Overall, it is clear that economic regionalism has been a huge success. Regional organisationsʼ
free trade areas, whilst not perfect, have significantly bolstered their member statesʼ economic
growth and allowed them to compete with China and the United States in the global economy.Evaluate The View That Regional Organisations Other Than The EU Have Been Successful And That This Will Lead To Further Integration. 30 Politics
Explained Essay Plan3
This will certainly lead to further integration in terms of the removal of trade barriers, however it
is unlikely to lead to supranationalism like the EU, as other regional organisations are strongly
committed to an intergovernmental structure and are reluctant to accept the political integration
that this would require.
Paragraph Two ➡ Security Regionalism
For: Regional Organisations Have Been Successful And This Will Lead To
Further Integration
The most successful example of security regionalism other than the EU is the African Union,
which has made considerable progress in stabilising conflict-prone areas and addressing
transnational threats.
The AU has developed a peacekeeping and conflict resolution framework through its Peace
and Security Council, which addresses instability across the continent. This body,
composed of 15 member states representing different regions of Africa, has the authority to
sanction member states, mediate conflicts, and deploy military forces.
It has authorised peacekeeping missions in conflict zones like Somalia and the Sahel
and has been very successful in stabilising conflicts when other actors have been
unsuccessful.
For example, in 2007 The African Union Mission in Somalia AMISOM deployed AU
peacekeepers with United Nations authorisation to stabilise Somalia in response to the
growing threat posed by the terrorist group Al-Shabaab, which had taken significant
territory from the government.
AMISOM helped Somali forces reclaim territory and maintain relative stability in
parts of the country. This was especially impressive given the fact that the UN and
US-led interventions in Somalia designed to do the same in the 1990s were largely a
failure.
The AU has also been effective in establishing frameworks for conflict prevention and
rapid response to enable member states to collaborate on addressing issues like
terrorism, organised crime, and cross-border conflict, reducing reliance on foreign
powers for security assistance and empowering African countries to handle their own
security challenges.
For example, the AU-led Nouakchott Process promotes cooperation among 11 West
African and Sahel countries to tackle terrorism and organised crime.
Through regular intelligence sharing and coordinated border security efforts, the AU
supports these nations in handling cross-border security issues independently.
As the world becomes more multipolar and regional conflicts will likely become more frequent,
it seems likely that other regional organisations will seek to replicate the African Union and
further integrate to tackle security challenges, especially as the AU has been able to do so
without member states giving up their sovereignty.
Against: Regional Organisations Havenʼt Been Successful And There Wonʼt Be
Further IntegrationEvaluate The View That Regional Organisations Other Than The EU Have Been Successful And That This Will Lead To Further Integration. 30 Politics
Explained Essay Plan4
On the other hand, ASEAN and the Arab League show that intergovernmental regional
organisations have struggled to cooperate in relation to security and prevent conflict, given they
have limited enforcement mechanisms and are committed to non-interference in the affairs of
member states.
The Arab Leagueʼs security initiatives are hindered by its consensus-based structure, which
makes decisive action challenging in complex conflicts, as there are inevitably going to be
disagreements between its 22 members. It is also limited by the fact it lacks any real means
to enforce its will, unlike the African Union which has its own peacekeeping force.
For example, whilst the Arab League did suspend Syriaʼs membership in 2011 due to
governmentʼs violent response to protestors that began the civil war, it struggled to play
a role in resolving the conflict as time went on. This was due not only due to its lack of
enforcement mechanisms, but also due to disagreements between its member states
over the role of external actors like Iran and Russia.
Similarly, ASEAN has struggled to address regional security threats due to its principle of
non-interference, which restricts member states from intervening in one anotherʼs internal
affairs.
This has often hampered ASEANʼs capacity to take decisive action in security crises,
such as the Rohingya crisis in Myanmar, where ASEANʼs response has been criticised
as inadequate.
Member states like Thailand and Indonesia called for stronger action, while others,
including Cambodia, suggested a non-interventionist approach. This divergence
delayed a unified response, limiting ASEANʼs ability to address the humanitarian and
security aspects of the crisis effectively.
As both ASEAN and the Arab League have limited enforcement mechanisms and require
consensus to make any decision, it seems unlikely there will be further security integration, as
there are divisions within both organisations about key security questions that will make action
that every member state is comfortable with very difficult.
They are intergovernmental organisations that have always operated on the basis of
consensus and non-interference in the internal affairs of member states. There is little to
suggest that this will change.
Judgement
Overall, the African Union has been very successful in its security integration due to showing
some willingness to override the sovereignty of member states when needed for peacekeeping.
Other regional organisations have been less successful due to their strong commitment to
intergovernmentalism, which results in tensions and divisions preventing effective action and
responses to threats.
This being said, it is very unlikely that there will be further integration in ASEAN or the Arab
League as both organisations are strongly committed to protecting member statesʼ sovereignty
and have member states with different geopolitical alliances, which would make security
cooperation very difficult.
Paragraph Three ➡ Political RegionalismEvaluate The View That Regional Organisations Other Than The EU Have Been Successful And That This Will Lead To Further Integration. 30 Politics
Explained Essay Plan5
For: Regional Organisations Have Been Successful And This Will Lead To
Further Integration
Political regionalism refers to the cooperation between states in a region to achieve shared
political goals. It can be argued that regional organisations other than the EU have been very
successful in this regard, as by cooperating they have increased the voice of their regions on
the global stage.
African countries have historically been marginalised in international relations, however the
African Union has helped them to unite and increase their voice by presenting a unified
stance on global issues like climate change and trade reform.
For example, the AU has been a member of the G20 since 2023 and at the 2024 Summit
in Rio de Janeiro, it represented the interests of African states by raising the importance
of debt restructuring and calling for access to financing so that African states could
achieve their significant potential for renewable energy.
Similarly, the Arab League has been able to have influence by presenting a collective front
on issues important to Arab nations.
In March 2025, amid escalating tensions in Gaza, the Arab League convened an
emergency summit in Cairo. At the summit, the Arab League endorsed Egyptʼs $53
billion Gaza Reconstruction Plan, which supported rebuilding Gaza whilst not moving its
residents or infringing upon their rights.
This plan was in response to Trumpʼs proposal to displace Gazaʼs residents and
establish U.S. leadership of the territory, which the Arab League saw as a threat to
Palestinian rights and shows how regional organisations can enhance the influence and
voice of member states on issues highly important to their region.
Political regionalism can also be argued to have been successful, as regional organisations
have effectively promoted democracy, human rights and other liberal values.
The African Unionʼs African Charter on Democracy, Elections, and Governance sets
standards for good governance, human rights, and democratic accountability. It has taken
actions to uphold these principles, including by suspending member states such as Mali
and Sudan after military coups.
This success in presenting a collective voice may lead to regional organisations deciding to
further integrate politically, particularly given the difficulties states will find when trying to have
influence alone in a geopolitical order characterised by big powers such as Russia, China and
the United States.
Against: Regional Organisations Havenʼt Been Successful And There Wonʼt Be
Further Integration
On the other hand, it can be argued that regional organisations other than the EU havenʼt been
politically successful, as divisions between member states and limited enforcement
mechanisms have undermined their ability to protect human rights or present a collective voice
on global issues.
For example, the Arab League has been criticised for inconsistently addressing human
rights abuses within member states, such as the limited response to the situation in Sudan.Evaluate The View That Regional Organisations Other Than The EU Have Been Successful And That This Will Lead To Further Integration. 30 Politics
Explained Essay Plan6
While Sudan has experienced severe crises in the past five years, including violence
against protesters and a Civil War, the Leagueʼs responses have often been muted, with
statements largely focused on calls for stability rather than direct condemnation of
certain actors or intervention.
This demonstrates how intergovernmental organisationsʼ divisions between member
states and a lack of enforcement powers undermine their ability to uphold their values.
Divisions between member states have undermined ASEANʼs ability to resolve the South
China Sea dispute, which is arguably its biggest geopolitical and security challenge, and
present a united front against China.
In 2016, a ruling by the Permanent Court of Arbitration PCA in favour of the Philippines
invalidated Chinaʼs broad claims in the South China Sea under international law.
However, ASEAN was unable to formally endorse the ruling due to internal
disagreements, weakening its stance and limiting its ability to hold China accountable.
In particular, there were tensions between Vietnam and the Philippines which seek
to hold China to account and others including Cambodia, which have close ties with
China and seek to avoid actions that could damage relations.
Regional organisations other than the EU can also be argued to have been unsuccessful in
terms of political regionalism, as they remain intergovernmental, with little progress towards the
supranationalism that could truly enable them to challenge on the global stage.
Supranationalism has been crucial in allowing the EU to have a clear strategic direction and
a clear voice in global politics, despite having a large number of diverse member states. The
European Commission in particular is able to represent the EUʼs collective interests in IGOs
such as the WTO, IMF, G7 and G20.
Despite this clear example of successful supranationalism, ASEAN, the Arab League and
the African Union remain committed to intergovernmentalism due to the desire of member
states to protect their sovereignty. Intergovernmentalism and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other member states were important founding principles of the Arab
League and ASEAN in particular.
The potential for supranationalism is made even less likely by the conflicting geopolitical
alliances members of the same regional organisations have.
For example, Qatar has a strong alliance with Iran, whilst Saudi Arabia is more
aligned with the United States and opposed to Iranian influence.
Similarly, Vietnam is broadly aligned with the United States, whilst Cambodia has
close ties with China.
Judgement
Overall, it is very unlikely that there will be further integration politically in regional organisations
other than the EU.
Their lack of supranationalism has certainly undermined their ability to have a collective voice
on the global stage on some issues, however they are still able to agree and have influence on
issues they can agree on.
The principles of intergovernmentalism and non-interference in the domestic affairs of other
states are central to ASEAN and Arab League in particular and with states that disagree onEvaluate The View That Regional Organisations Other Than The EU Have Been Successful And That This Will Lead To Further Integration. 30 Politics
Explained Essay Plan7
some important issues facing their regions, it is unlikely that further political integration would
be effective.
Overall Argument
In conclusion, regional organisations other than the EU have been largely successful, however it
is unlikely that this will lead to further integration.
Regional organisations have been effective in allowing smaller states to come together and
have a global voice and influence in a geopolitical world dominated by powerful states like
China and the United States. This is especially true economically, where they have boosted
economic growth through free trade areas and signed trade agreements with other countries.
This being said, it is unlikely there will be further integration in political or security terms to
move regional organisations closer to supranational structures like the EU. This is due both to
the fact that member states within ASEAN, the AU and the Arab League have conflicting
interests and geopolitical allies, as well as to the fact that intergovernmentalism and the
reluctance to impede the sovereignty of other member states are important principles held by
these organisations which have no desire to give up control over domestic policy.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting
This Plan To Answer
Evaluate the view that the EU has been a model for regionalism around the world. 30
Evaluate the view that regional organisation arenʼt effectively able to challenge individual states
for influence in global politics. 30
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedEvaluate The View That Regional Organisations Other Than The EU Have Been Successful And That This Will Lead To Further Integration. 30 Politics
Explained Essay Plan8
