Evaluate The View That Sovereignty Is The Biggest Barrier To The Protection Of Human Rights In Global Politics. (30)
Politics Explained Essay Plan
Topic ➡ 3. Global Governance: Human Rights and Environmental
Structure ➡ Three paragraphs with for/against and an overall judgement within each
This Essay Plan Is Part Of A Package Of Essay Plans Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here ➡
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These are long plans as theyʼre intended to be revised from to cover the key
content you need to know for the exam. In the exam, you would need to adapt them for the
specific question you are asked and you certainly wouldnʼt need to include everything,
especially not all of the examples. The judgements are also subjective and you donʼt have to
agree with them!
Introduction
Key Definitions
Sovereignty is the authority of a state to govern itself and manage its internal affairs, making
and enforcing laws independently of external control.
Paragraph One ➡ Sovereignty Undermines International Courts
vs Sovereignty Doesnʼt Undermine International Courts
For: Sovereignty Is The Greatest Barrier To Human Rights Protection As It
Allows States To Ignore The Rulings Of International Courts
The most important way that sovereignty acts as a barrier to human rights protection is that it
limits the effectiveness of international courts, as they lack the power to enforce their rulingsEvaluate The View That Sovereignty Is The Biggest Barrier To The Protection Of Human Rights In Global Politics. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan1
without state compliance. This means that state sovereignty hinders their effectiveness in many
cases.
This is supported by a realist perspective that argues states are primarily driven by self-
interest and will prioritise their own sovereignty and interests rather than implementing an
international courtʼs decision that goes against them.
For realists, this means that courts lack true enforceability/power to protect human rights,
as they cannot override state sovereignty and compel states to comply with their decisions.
The International Court of Justice ICJ is often unable to enforce human rights standards, as its
decisions rely on the political will of member states to implement them, due to the fact that the
UN lacks its own police force/enforcement mechanisms.
In the case of South Africa v. Israel the ICJ issued a ruling ordering Israel to prevent
genocidal acts and let humanitarian aid into Gaza, whilst late ordering Israel to immediately
halt its military offensive in Rafah in May 2024. Israel didnʼt immediately halt its offensive in
Rafah and has stopped humanitarian aid from entering Gaza on numerous occasions since
the ruling.
States can therefore selectively comply with international courtsʼ rulings and ignore them
when they conflict with the governmentʼs domestic priorities and interests. This shows how
state sovereignty is a significant obstacle to international courts upholding rights, as courts
have no enforcement power.
This also prevents international courts from prosecuting perpetrators/leaders of human rights
abuses, as they rely on state cooperation to help them investigate war crimes and to arrest
those they have convicted.
The ICC, for example, depends on the cooperation of member states to execute arrest
warrants and facilitate investigations.
Despite being convicted, Omar al-Bashir, the former President of Sudan, avoided arrest
for years despite an ICC indictment for crimes related to the Darfur conflict, as several
states including South Africa, Kenya and Jordan refused to enforce the warrant when he
was visiting their countries.
Against: International Courts Are Effective In Protecting Human Rights Despite
This And Upholding Sovereignty Is Important
On the other hand, it can be argued that sovereignty isnʼt a major barrier to international courts
upholding human rights, as they can put significant moral pressure on states. This means that
they are often able to convince states to change their behaviour through legal rulings, without
infringing upon state sovereignty.
This is supported by a liberal perspective, which views the rules-based international order
and the moral pressure of the international community as having real power and the ability
to uphold human rights effectively.
The International Court of Justice ICJ encourages compliance with human rights by settling
disputes between states, whilst the European Court of Human Rights ECHR enables
individuals to directly bring cases against states for alleged violations of their rights.
The ECHRʼs judgements have not only forced states to respect the human rights of
individual complainants, they have also promoted legal and policy reforms in member statesEvaluate The View That Sovereignty Is The Biggest Barrier To The Protection Of Human Rights In Global Politics. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan2
to protect the human rights of wider groups. This demonstrates how courtsʼ moral pressure
can effect legal reforms within sovereign states that protect human rights.
For example, in Goodwin v. United Kingdom 2002, the Courtʼs ruling that the UKʼs
failure to legally recognise a transgender womanʼs gender reassignment violated her
rights to respect for private life Article 8 led the UK to enact the Gender Recognition
Act, allowing transgender individuals to obtain legal recognition of their gender.
The ICJ is also able to protect human rights by settling disputes between states and
creating pressure on states to comply, especially as states consent to the jurisdiction of the
ICJ and are supposed to accept its judgements as binding.
For example, in Democratic Republic of Congo v. Uganda 2022, the ICJ ordered
Uganda to pay $325 million in reparations to the DRC for its military intervention during
the late 1990s that included human rights abuses and the illegal exploitation of natural
resources. Uganda complied with the judgement and has made the first payment.
Rather than state sovereignty being the biggest barrier to the protection of human rights in
global politics, it can therefore be argued that the attitudes of some states that reject human
rights norms and refuse to comply with international courts are a more significant barrier.
Judgement
Overall, it is clear that sovereignty is a significant barrier to the protection of human rights in
global politics, as it means that states can simply decide not to accept the rulings of
international courts.
However, many countries do accept the rulings of international courts and it is therefore the
attitudes of the states that donʼt rather than sovereignty itself, that is the biggest barrier to the
protection of human rights.
Paragraph Two ➡ Humanitarian Interventions Override State
Sovereignty vs Sovereignty Has Prevented Humanitarian
Interventions In the Past Decade
Against: Humanitarian Interventions Can Override State Sovereignty To Protect
Human Rights
Another important argument that sovereignty isnʼt the biggest barrier to human rights globally is
that humanitarian interventions are able to override state sovereignty in order to protect human
rights when violations are imminent. This means that vulnerable populations can be protected
despite state sovereignty.
The end of the Cold War, marked by unipolarity and the U.S. championing liberal democracy,
created a global environment in which humanitarian interventions became frequent, highlighting
the international communityʼs commitment to immediate human rights protection.
A notable example is the NATO-led intervention in Kosovo in 1999, launched specifically to
prevent mass violence against ethnic Albanians by Serbian forces. Despite bypassing a
Security Council veto, NATOʼs intervention successfully halted large-scale violence and
forced Yugoslav forces to withdraw, saving civilian lives that would likely have been lost
without direct intervention and successfully establishing a de facto independent Kosovo
under international supervision.Evaluate The View That Sovereignty Is The Biggest Barrier To The Protection Of Human Rights In Global Politics. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan3
Similarly, the successful INTERFET intervention in East Timor 1999 demonstrated how
rapid, well-coordinated intervention can uphold human rights that is being committed in part
by a state.
Backed by UN authorisation, Australian-led forces restored order, facilitated East
Timorʼs independence, and established a foundation for lasting peace. This stopped
violent action and human rights abuses by pro-Indonesian militias that was facilitated by
the Indonesian military.
Importantly, the ability of the international community to override state sovereignty to protect
rights was legitimised by the Responsibility to Protect R2P doctrine, which was formally
endorsed by the UN in 2025
R2P set out that a nation state had a responsibility to protect the human rights of their own
citizens and that if they didnʼt do so, other states had a responsibility to override their
sovereignty and intervene to prevent human rights abuses.
The R2P came into force in NATOʼs 2011 intervention in Libya, authorised by the UNSC, as
Muammar Gaddafi threatened large-scale civilian massacres in Benghazi and elsewhere in
response to the Arab Spring Uprising.
The intervention successfully prevented a massacre in Benghazi and contributed to the
overthrow of Gaddafiʼs regime, demonstrating how state sovereignty isnʼt a significant
barrier to upholding human rights when the international community unites around the
protection of a population.
For: Sovereignty Has Prevented Humanitarian Interventions In The Past Decade
On the other hand, it can be argued that sovereignty is the biggest barrier to human rights
protection today, as in the past decade in particular it has prevented any international
humanitarian interventions from taking place and therefore allowed human rights abuses across
the world to take place unopposed.
Over the past 15 years, the rise in power of China and Russia has significantly impacted the
global willingness and capacity to engage in humanitarian interventions. Both countries have
been strong supporters of the principle of state sovereignty and have opposed any international
actions that could be perceived as violating this norm, even to protect human rights under the
R2P doctrine.
They have used their UNSC vetoes to block resolutions that could authorise humanitarian
action. This assertive use of veto power has created an environment where major
humanitarian interventions are increasingly difficult, if not impossible, to pursue.
As a result human rights crises have proliferated across the world. While some of these like
the Uyghur Genocide in Xinjiang would not have attracted intervention in the 1990s due to
occurring in powerful states or those backed by major powers like Russia and China, others
such as the Rohingya Genocide in Myanmar or the widespread casualties and victims of
sexual violence in the Sudanese civil war may have.
Further, even during the 1990s and early 2000s, the international communityʼs hesitation about
infringing upon state sovereignty led to inaction that could have prevented multiple instances of
widespread human rights violations.
The clearest example of this was the Rwandan genocide in 1994, when approximately
800,000 Tutsi and moderate Hutu were killed in just 100 days. Despite warnings from UNEvaluate The View That Sovereignty Is The Biggest Barrier To The Protection Of Human Rights In Global Politics. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan4
officials and NGOs about the impending violence, the international community failed to act,
with the 270 UN peacekeepers already in the country lacking the capacity to meaningfully
prevent the violence.
COUNTERPOINT On the other hand, it could be argued that sovereignty preventing
humanitarian interventions is in fact beneficial for human rights protection, rather than being an
obstacle to it.
This is because humanitarian interventions have often caused major civilian casualties. For
example, NATO bombings in Kosovo 1999, while aimed at protecting the ethnic Albanian
population from violence by Serbian forces, mistakenly targeted civilian infrastructure,
including hospitals, schools, and residential areas, leading to the deaths of hundreds of
civilians.
Judgement
The effectiveness of humanitarian interventions in the 1990s and 2000s shows that sovereignty
doesnʼt have to be a major barrier to the protection of human rights in global politics, as it can
be overriden to prevent human rights abuses.
Overall, therefore, it isnʼt sovereignty that is the greatest barrier to human rights protection
today, it is the growing power of Russia and China and their willingness to use sovereignty as
justification for allowing human rights abuses to continue.
Paragraph Three ➡ Sovereignty Allows States To Not Accept
International Human Rights Law vs The Attitudes Of The Worldʼs
Biggest Powers Are A Much Bigger Barrier To Human Rights
Protection
For: Sovereignty Is The Greatest Barrier To Human Rights Protection As It
Allows States To Not Accept The Jurisdiction Of International Courts
A final argument that sovereignty is the greatest barrier to human rights protection is that it
allows states to not accept the jurisdiction of international courts. This means that states can
simply decide to not accept some aspects of international human rights law, in a way that
individuals canʼt do with domestic law.
Realists argue that state sovereignty means that international law isnʼt really law and doesnʼt
constrain states, as it relies on their willingness to accept it and there are limited
enforcement mechanisms.
This is seen most clearly in the ICC, where 70 states including powerful nations such as Russia,
China and the United States havenʼt signed the Rome Statute. This means that the ICC doesnʼt
have jurisdiction over these 70 countries and canʼt act against individuals and leaders from
these nations.
For example, it hasnʼt been able to investigate those responsible for genocide and crimes
against humanity by China against the Uyghur Muslim population in Xinjiang, as China
doesnʼt accept its jurisdiction.
It can also be seen in relation to the ICJ, which is not able to proceed with a case if a state
doesnʼt accept its jurisdiction.Evaluate The View That Sovereignty Is The Biggest Barrier To The Protection Of Human Rights In Global Politics. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan5
For example, in March 2025, Sudan filed a case against the UAE at the ICJ, accusing it of
violating the Genocide Convention by financially and militarily supporting the Rapid Support
Forces RSF in carrying out human rights abuses in Darfur.
However, the ICJ ruled it couldnʼt proceed with the case as the UAE doesnʼt accept the
jurisdiction of the ICJ to include it in dispute in relation to the Genocide Convention.
Against: The Changing Attitudes Of China, Russia and the United States Are A
Much Greater Threat To Human Rights
On the other hand, it can be argued that sovereignty isnʼt the biggest barrier to the protection of
human rights globally, as the power and attitudes of China, Russia and the United States are a
much greater threat.
During the 1990s and 2000s, the United Statesʼ global hegemony and the importance given
to human rights meant that sovereignty wasnʼt a significant barrier to upholding human
rights, as there was a willingness to override it with humanitarian interventions.
Rather than sovereignty being the barrier to human rights protection today, it is therefore
instead the changed attitudes of the worldʼs biggest powers and their reluctance to use their
power to protect human rights.
Russia and China have risen in power and strongly opposed the protection of human rights if it
undermines state sovereignty to do so. As they are both P5 members with a veto on the UN
Security Council, they have also been able to use their structural power to prevent
interventions.
For example, Russia repeatedly vetoed resolutions aimed at addressing human rights crises
in the Syrian Civil War, shielding its ally Bashar al-Assad from international military
responses despite evidence of widespread human rights abuses, including the use of
chemical weapons.
The decline in humanitarian interventions has also been influenced by the United Statesʼ
rejection of its previous role as the global police force and its shift instead towards isolationism,
which began in the late 2000s and has continued into the 2010s and 2020s.
The costly and prolonged military campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan shifted U.S. policy
away from foreign intervention and toward domestic priorities, a trend that began with
Obamaʼs presidency and intensified under Trumpʼs “America Firstˮ policy.
The U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan in 2021 under Biden underscored this shift,
marking an ongoing reluctance to commit U.S. military forces and lead humanitarian
missions, particularly where strategic interests are not clearly at stake.
This lack of willingness to use its hard power to protect human rights across the world is
also influenced by the growing power of Russia and China. As the world is becoming more
multipolar and the United States is increasingly challenged, it wants to focus on the threat
of China in particular doesnʼt want to overstretch itself by committing military power in other
parts of the world.
Judgement
Sovereignty certainly does allow states to not accept the jurisdiction of international human
rights law, as international courts lack enforcement powers.Evaluate The View That Sovereignty Is The Biggest Barrier To The Protection Of Human Rights In Global Politics. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan6
This being said, it doesnʼt have to be a barrier to human rights protection, as if they worldʼs
most powerful states decided to, they could use their soft to pressure states to accept the
jurisdiction of international courts and their hard power to override state sovereignty and
protect human rights through military interventions.
It is therefore the attitudes of the worldʼs most powerful states and the reduced willingness
by the U.S. in particular to protect human rights that is the greatest barrier to human rights
protection in global politics.
Overall Argument
In conclusion, sovereignty isnʼt the greatest barrier to the protection of human rights in global
politics.
There is no doubt that sovereignty is used as justification by states to not accept international
courtsʼ rulings, not accept international courtsʼ jurisdiction and to not pursue humanitarian
interventions to protect human rights. However, sovereignty doesnʼt have to be a barrier to
human rights protection if the international community is willing to override it, as successful
interventions in the 1990s and early 2000s showed.
Therefore, it isnʼt sovereignty that is the greatest barrier to the protection of human rights, it is
the reduced willingness of the international community and the worldʼs greatest powers to
protect human rights in the way that they used to, especially the United States. Sovereignty is
the justification they use to not protect human rights, but is not the central reason/barrier.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting
This Plan To Answer
Evaluate the view that universal human rights are no longer upheld in global politics. 30
Evaluate the view that humanitarian interventions are no longer effective in upholding human
rights globally. 30
Evaluate the view that international human rights courts will always be undermined by state
sovereignty. 30
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedEvaluate The View That Sovereignty Is The Biggest Barrier To The Protection Of Human Rights In Global Politics. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan7
