Evaluate The View That The US Can No Longer Claim Global Hegemonic Status. (30) Politics Explained Essay
Plan
Topic ➡ 4. Power and Developments
Structure ➡ Three paragraphs with for/against and an overall judgement within each
This Essay Plan Is Part Of A Package Of Essay Plans Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here ➡
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These are long plans as theyʼre intended to be revised from to cover the key
content you need to know for the exam. In the exam, you would need to adapt them for the
specific question you are asked and you certainly wouldnʼt need to include everything,
especially not all of the examples. The judgements are also subjective and you donʼt have to
agree with them!
Introduction
Key Definitions
If a country has ‘global hegemonic statusʼ, it is dominant over international affairs with no other
state able to meaningfully challenge its power. This dominance applies across the economic,
geopolitical and military spheres.
Paragraph One ➡ Economic Power
For: The US Can No Longer Claim Global Hegemonic Status
The most persuasive argument that the US can no longer claim global hegemonic status is that
Chinaʼs economic rise has enabled it to rival the United Statesʼ power, making the global
economy bipolar and reducing the influence of the US.Evaluate The View That The US Can No Longer Claim Global Hegemonic Status. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan1
Chinaʼs economic growth over the past four decades has been extraordinary, making it the
worldʼs second-largest economy with a nominal GDP of approximately $19 trillion in 2024. It is
expected to become the worldʼs largest economy by 2035.
Central to this has been its dominance of global manufacturing since joining the World
Trade Organisation WTO in 2001. China accounts for 30% of global output, making it the
worldʼs manufacturing hub.
It is deeply entrenched in global supply chains, with many countries and corporations
dependent on Chinese production, and as a result this economic power will be near
impossible to weaken despite US attempts to decouple from China.
Importantly, this economic power challenges the USʼ overall geopolitical influence as China is
an important player in geopolitically important sectors and many other countriesʼ economies are
dependent on China, often far more so than they are on the United States.
China is increasingly competitive in sectors such as 5G technology, artificial intelligence,
biotechnology and electric vehicles, all of which are central to geopolitical competition and
economic power in the 21st century.
Chinese companies like Huawei, Tencent and electric vehicle manufacturer BYD are
huge, technologically advanced companies that are scaring the US into imposing
sanctions.
Particularly important was the gains main by AI company Deepseek in early 2025, which
shocked U.S. competitors like Nvidia who thought they dominated the market, resulting
in a major fall in their stock price.
China is also the worldʼs largest exporter and the largest trading partner for more than 120
countries, including many in Asia, Africa, and Europe.
It is able to leverage this economic influence for geopolitical gain and to destabilise the
West, as can be seen in the fact that Hungary has become an important supporter of its
influence within the European Union, therefore causing rifts in a key economic
competitor.
Coupled with this rise of a strategic competitor is the fact that the US economy faces a number
of important challenges, most notably its huge national debt and extremely high level of
inequality, which has contributed to destabilising political tensions.
Its national debt has surpassed $36 trillion and in 2025, the top 1% of Americans control
nearly 40% of the nationʼs wealth.
Against: The US Can Still Claim Global Hegemonic Status
On the other hand, it can be argued that the United States can still claim global hegemonic
status as its economic power is far more entrenched than that of the Chinese economy, which
lacks a number of the structural factors that support the USʼ economic dominance.
The US dollar is the worldʼs reserve currency, accounting for nearly 60% of global reserves.
This ensures American influence in global trade and financial systems and gives it
significant influence over other countriesʼ economic success.
US companies also continue to be the worldʼs biggest brands and it has the worldʼs most
advanced and highly regarded universities, which have a global reputation built over
decades.Evaluate The View That The US Can No Longer Claim Global Hegemonic Status. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan2
7 out of the top 10 global brands and 61 out of the top 100 global brands are American.
These include Amazon, Apple, Google and Tesla.
Though Chinaʼs currency is growing in power and it has a growing number of global brands
and good universities, it can be argued that it still lags behind significantly in these areas,
which reduce the real threat it poses to the United States as the global hegemon.
Further, though Chinaʼs economic growth so far has been remarkable, it is still heavily reliant on
exports and investment and there are numerous challenges that suggest it may not be able to
continue this economic success.
China has very high corporate and local government debt, which exceeded 280% of GDP in
recent years.
Moreover, Chinaʼs economy is confronting a significant demographic challenge: its
population is aging rapidly, with a shrinking workforce.
This is coupled with a slowing growth rate, which fell to below 5% in 2024, a far cry
from the double-digit growth rates of the 1990s and 2000s.
Judgement
Overall, the most persuasive argument is that China's rapid economic growth over the past 30
years means that the US can no longer claim global hegemonic power. With China soon to be
the world's largest economy and becoming increasingly competitive in important hi-tech
industries, it may soon not be the worldʼs moat powerful economy, let alone hegemonic.
Paragraph Two ➡ Military Power
Against: The US Can Still Claim Global Hegemonic Status
Perhaps the most powerful argument for the United Statesʼ continued hegemonic status is that
its military remains far more powerful, well funded and technologically advanced than any other
military and is the only country with a truly global military presence.
While Chinaʼs military rise is significant, the U.S. remains far ahead in terms of overall
capabilities and military spending. Its defence budget of $997 billion in 2024 is larger than the
next 10 countries combined, including Chinaʼs which it is four times bigger than.
With over 700 military bases worldwide, the US also has unmatched global reach, allowing
it to project power anywhere in the world and defend allies in multiple arenas at the same
time, including Europe, the Middle East and Asia.
The United Statesʼ military hegemony is also supported by a number of highly effective military
alliances with other great powers, which are specifically designed to deter and limit the
influence of its two greatest military rivals; China and Russia.
In the Indo-Pacific region, the US has established the Quad - a strategic alliance between
the United States, Japan, India, and Australia - to counterbalance Chinaʼs growing influence.
Through joint military exercises, security dialogues, and economic initiatives, the Quad
strengthens regional security and deters potential coercive actions by China.
Similarly, in Europe NATOʼs principle of collective defence deters Russian aggression and
gives the United States a strong framework through which to practice and carry out
collective military action.Evaluate The View That The US Can No Longer Claim Global Hegemonic Status. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan3
For: The US Can No Longer Claim Global Hegemonic Status
On the other hand, it can be argued that the United States can no longer claim global
hegemonic status, as the increasingly multipolar nature of the world order means that the US is
no longer willing nor able to dominate in every region of the world at the same time.
The US remains a superpower, but the growing power of a number of countries across the
world has meant it is increasingly stretched and no longer able to dominate in Europe, Asia
and the Middle East at the same time. As a result, it can be argued it is no longer
hegemonic.
Russia has challenged US military power and willingness to provide funding in Europe by
invading Ukraine; a fellow democracy which sits on the border of a number of NATO states.
At the same time, China has become increasingly assertive in the South China Sea by
militarising existing island and creating other artificial islands to use as military bases.
Coupled with these great power threats has been the increasing assertiveness of growing
powers, including Iran, Saudi Arabia and Turkey in both North Africa and the Middle East.
The United Statesʼ military hegemony has been further undermined by its unwillingness to
commit manpower and funding to all of these regions at the same time.
A significant portion of the U.S. population and political class, led by Trumpʼs populism, is
no longer willing to spend enormous sums seeking to project American power in every
corner of the globe at all times.
Instead, Trump has pressured allies, such as those in NATO, to increase their military
spending and has suggested that spending should be diverted to tackling domestic
problems, reflecting his ‘America Firstʼ approach.
Judgement
Overall, the US military remains far more powerful than the next few countriesʼ militaries
combined and the only country able to project military power in every part of the world.
However, it can no longer claim military hegemony as it is becoming increasingly challenged by
revisionist powers Iran, China and Russia in Europe, Asia and the Middle East.
As a result it is stretched and there are questions around it's ability to act in different parts of
the world at the same time in order to maintain hegemony.
Paragraph Three ➡ Geopolitics
For: The US Can No Longer Claim Global Hegemonic Status
A final important argument that the United States can no longer claim global hegemonic status
is that it faces a major challenges by a coalition of states intent on reducing its dominance, led
by China which has clear intentions to replace it as the global hegemon.
China, Russia, Iran and North Korea have formed an axis in global power that poses a major
threat to the US.
They share the common goal to reduce US influence globally, including in Eurasia and the
Middle East and are cooperating in order to achieve this objective, both economically and
through joint military exercises.Evaluate The View That The US Can No Longer Claim Global Hegemonic Status. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan4
Further, they are an extremely effective alliance as the major energy powers of Russia and
Iran are able to bolster the economic power of China, which is able to grow with a secure
source of oil and natural gas. Further, this alliance also undermines the United States which
must use other partners from whom to purchase oil.
Iran, for example, exports 90% of its oil to China.
The US is also challenged as Chinaʼs President Xi has a clear vision to bring about the
rejuvenation of the Chinese nation and to depose the United States. In the last decade in
particular, China has pursued this by growing its interdependence with countries in the Global
South through the Belt and Road Initiative BRI.
The Belt and Road Initiative BRI was launched in 2013 to develop trade routes that link
China with countries across the world and by 2024 over 140 countries have joined the
initiative.
It is designed to deepen Chinaʼs economic ties with partner countries, and extend
Chinaʼs strategic influence through a large number of infrastructure projects in other
countries funded by Chinese capital and loans.
As a result of the initiative, it has been able to both achieve strategic objectives and grow its
economic importance in many countries, therefore increasing its leverage and challenging
the United Statesʼ network of alliances with countries across the globe, which it uses for
important raw materials.
For example, the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor CPEC involves constructing
highways and energy projects between China and Pakistan.
This has not only helped China reduce its reliance on trade moving through the South
China Sea and helped it secure an alternative route for oil from the Middle East, it has
also given it leverage over the political decisions of Pakistanʼs government to ensure
they are in Chinaʼs interest.
Against: The US Can Still Claim Global Hegemonic Status
On the other hand, it can be argued that the United States remains global hegemony as it has a
far more powerful and effective network of alliances with other great powers that allow it to limit
the threat that China and Russia pose across the world.
The U.S. leads alliances like NATO, which includes 30 member states, and bilateral defence
agreements with key players in the Indo-Pacific, such as Japan, South Korea, and Australia.
Further, the US has strong historical alliances with the European great powers of the
United Kingdom, France and Germany, as well as Japan and Turkey. The economic
power of these allies far outweighs that of Russia and Iran.
Even if there are an increasingly number of powers, this arguably doesnʼt reduce US
hegemony as it has strong links with many powers and is able to influence them to
pursue its objectives.
Trumpʼs second Presidency so far has strained these alliances, but the U.S. retains
significant leverage over them and it seems unlikely they will shift to aligning with China
rather than the U.S.
In contrast, China and Russia have relatively few formal allies, and many of their
relationships are transactional or based on economic dependency, rather than strongEvaluate The View That The US Can No Longer Claim Global Hegemonic Status. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan5
military alliances.
In fact, many of Chinaʼs infrastructure projects involved in the Belt and Road Initiative
have led to it being accused of ‘dept-trap diplomacyʼ, where it gains strategic influence
after countries struggle to repay their loans, such as with Sri Lankaʼs Hambantota Port.
This has undermined Chinaʼs global reputation as it has been accused of exploiting
countriesʼ poverty and dependence for its own interests.
Additionally, Chinaʼs aggressive behaviour in areas like the South China Sea and its treatment of
Uyghurs in Xinjiang, as well as Russiaʼs political repression and human rights violations in
Ukraine, have decreased their soft power and alienated many potential partners, particularly in
the West.
Countries such as India, which once saw China as a partner, have grown wary of its
intentions, particularly after the border clashes between Chinese and Indian troops in the
Himalayas.
Judgement
Overall, the United States no doubt has more soft power and a more effective network of allies
than any other country.
However, it is no longer hegemonic in this regard as the cooperation between Russia, Iran and
China forms a powerful group of revisionist powers that pose a significant challenge to its
dominance in different parts of the world, particularly due to their strength in terms of oil
reserves.
Overall Argument
In conclusion, this essay has therefore strongly argued that the United States can no longer
claim to be the global hegemon. It remains the world's most powerful country, however the rise
of China's economy and its cooperation with Russia and Iran mean that it faces a greater
challenge than at any point since the end of the Cold War. The world is now multipolar and
increasingly bipolar, rather than unipolar.
These revisionist powers pose such a challenge to the United States as they threaten it militarily
and geopolitically in different parts of the world at the same time, whilst sharing the aim of
decreasing US power and its dominance of global politics.
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting
This Plan To Answer
Evaluate the view that the state system and world order have scarcely changed since 2000.
30
Evaluate the view that the world order is now bipolar. 30
Evaluate the view that the world order is now multipolar. 30
Evaluate the view that the United States is a declining superpower. 30
Evaluate the view that globalisation has made the world unipolar not multipolar. 30Evaluate The View That The US Can No Longer Claim Global Hegemonic Status. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan6
Evaluate the view that the rise of emerging powers means that the USA can no longer claim
global hegemonic status. 30
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedEvaluate The View That The US Can No Longer Claim Global Hegemonic Status. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan7
