Evaluate The View That The Spread Of Democracy, Liberal Economies And The Rule Of Law Are In Decline. (30)
Politics Explained Essay Plan
Topic ➡ 4. Power and Developments
Structure ➡ Three paragraphs with for/against and an overall judgement within each
This Essay Plan Is Part Of A Package Of Essay Plans Covering The Global Politics Part Of The
Politics A Level Course For The Edexcel Exam Board. It Can Be Purchased Here ➡
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Keep In Mind ➡ These are long plans as theyʼre intended to be revised from to cover the key
content you need to know for the exam. In the exam, you would need to adapt them for the
specific question you are asked and you certainly wouldnʼt need to include everything,
especially not all of the examples. The judgements are also subjective and you donʼt have to
agree with them!
Introduction
Key Definitions
A liberal economy is characterised by free markets, minimal government intervention, and the
protection of private property. The aim is to maximise economic growth and innovation by
allowing market forces to operate with limited state interference.
The rule of law is the principle that all individuals and institutions, including the government, are
subject to and accountable under the law. It ensures that laws are applied consistently and
fairly, protecting citizens from arbitrary power.
Democracy is a system of government in which political power is vested in the people, either
directly or through elected representatives.
Paragraph One ➡ Liberal EconomiesEvaluate The View That The Spread Of Democracy, Liberal Economies And The Rule Of Law Are In Decline. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan1
For: Liberal Economies Are In Decline
Since the 2008 financial crisis in particular, it can be argued that liberal economies have been in
significant decline with their flaws exposed, Western governments moving away from
promoting the ideals of free trade and successful alternatives gaining prominence.
The 2008 financial crisis arguably did permanent damage to liberal economies, which had since
the end of the Cold War been spreading across the world and promoted by the United States
and prominent international governmental organisations IGOs) as the only path towards
economic development and prosperity.
It led to widespread disillusionment with neoliberal economic policies. Many argued that the
deregulated markets championed by liberal economists had failed to protect ordinary
citizens and had exacerbated inequality.
In the United States, the top 1% of earners captured 20% of total national income by
2020, compared to 10% in 1980.
The crisis also forced the government to step in an bailout banks, such as the the $700
billion Troubled Asset Relief Program TARP in the United States; showing the important
role the state has to play in managing economies.
The financial crisis also led to the decline of liberal economies as the economic deprivation it
created contributed to the growing support for populist movements across the world, which
gained traction by criticising the failures of globalisation and free-market policies.
In the US, Trump has shifted U.S. economic policy to be very protectionist rather than free
trade since his reelection in 2024.
In April 2025, the U.S. placing a 145% tariff on most Chinese goods and placing a 10% tariff
on all imports to the U.S. from elsewhere, whilst the United States continues to prevent the
WTO from promoting free trade by refusing to approve new appointments to its Appellate
body.
Finally, it can also be argued that liberal economies are in decline, as the economic success of
China under state-managed capitalism presents a real alternative and challenge to free market
capitalism.
Through a combination of state control and market elements, China has achieved rapid
economic growth, becoming the worldʼs second-largest economy.
This has undermined the idea that neoliberal reforms and economics are the only path to
economic success and countries may begin to adopt Chinaʼs model, particularly as it seeks
to increase its global influence through the Belt and Road Initiative BRI.
Against: Liberal Economies Arenʼt In Decline
On the other hand, it can be argued that liberal economies arenʼt in decline as they remain a
dominant global force, with free-market principles continuing to drive growth in many regions.
Major economies such as the United States, the European Union, and Japan still rely on
free-market capitalism, fostering innovation and global competition.
Of the worldʼs top ten countries by GDP, nine of them remain liberal economies and
there is significant economic interaction between them.Evaluate The View That The Spread Of Democracy, Liberal Economies And The Rule Of Law Are In Decline. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan2
With supply chains between these countries so deeply interlinked and multinational
corporations having significant power, it seems unlikely that these countries will move
away from free market capitalism and liberal economies.
Further, in Asia, liberal economic principles helped lift over 1.2 billion people out of extreme
poverty from 1990 to 2015, according to World Bank data, largely due to growth driven by
global trade and foreign investment.
It can also be argued that liberal economies arenʼt in decline, as the system of economic global
governance continues to promote liberal economic principles across the world.
The International Monetary Fund IMF and World Bank continue to operate based on the
belief that free market capitalism is the solution to development and promotes it through
conditions placed on its loans.
For example, the IMF gave Argentina a $20 billion bailout package in April 2025 to
tackle its foreign currency crisis, because of the fact that President Javier Milei had
implemented a strict austerity agenda since becoming President in 2023.
The World Trade Organisation WTO also promotes liberal economies by supporting free
trade and protecting against protectionism through facilitating multilateral trade agreements
and resolving disputes to prevent trade wars.
All of the worldʼs biggest economies are members of the WTO and follow its rules the
vast majority of the time.
Judgement
Overall, global trade isnʼt under any threat as global supply chains are deeply entrenched, but
liberal economies are in decline due to the rise of protectionism and the undermining of the
belief that they are the solution to economic development.
The 2008 financial crash and Chinaʼs economic success in particular have proven that liberal
economics isnʼt perfect or the best way to economic growth. As a result, even though they still
remain the most common economic system globally, they are in decline from their height in the
1990s.
Paragraph Two ➡ The Rule Of Law
For: The Rule Of Law Is In Decline
There is a strong argument that the rule of law has been in significant decline over the past
decade, both in Western countries that have been democracies for a long time and due to the
rise in power of powerful authoritarian regimes that have long ignored the rule of law.
The rise of populism in Western countries over the past decade has been accompanied by
attacks on the rule of law, particularly in democracies where populist leaders have sought to
undermine judicial independence and weaken democratic checks and balances against their
power.
In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice Party has sought to take control of the judiciary by
replacing independent judges and altering the constitutional court.
In the United States since Trumpʼs reelection in 2025, there have been numerous
accusations that the administrationʼs mass deportation programme has included the denialEvaluate The View That The Spread Of Democracy, Liberal Economies And The Rule Of Law Are In Decline. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan3
of due process to large numbers of migrants, which Trump and the Republican Party are
perfectly happy to accept.
After a period of the rule of lawʼs strength in the decade after the Cold War, it can therefore
be argued there has been significant decline. It is clear that judicial institutions and respect
for the rule of law are far weaker than way thought in this period.
This is not just in Europe, with clear threats to the rule of law from leaders in the
Philippines, Brazil and India among other countries.
The rule of law has also been damaged by rise of China and Russia in power, which have used
their legal systems to suppress dissent and maintain power within their own countries, whilst
also using their power in international institutions to prevent the erosion of state sovereignty to
protect human rights in other countries.
Both countries have used their veto on the security council to prevent international
movement against their erosion of the rule of law and human rights, including against
investigations of Chinaʼs genocide against the Uyghurs and Russiaʼs illegal invasion of
Ukraine.
These attacks on the rule of law have arguably been facilitated by the United Statesʼ loss of
global reputation as a defender of the rule of law in the War on Terror and therefore its
ability to promote human rights globally.
During the War on Terror, the US proved itself as a hypocrite as it used torture and
unlawfully imprisoned ‘enemy combatantsʼ in Guantanamo Bay, whilst using state
surveillance that undermined the privacy and civil liberties of its own citizens.
Against: The Rule Of Law Isnʼt In Decline
On the other hand, it can be argued that the rule of law isnʼt in decline, as it continues to be a
fundamental aspect of governance in many parts of the world.
In democratic countries across Europe and Asia, judicial independence remains strong, with
legal frameworks that ensure accountability and protect individual rights.
In the United States, for example, Donald Trump sought to undermine the rule of law by
challenging the results of the 2020 election, but the rule of law and judicial institutions were
strong enough to force him out of office, whilst the Supreme Court has also more recently
stood against his attempts to deny due process to deported migrants.
The rule of law is also upheld by international governmental institutions IGOs) like the
European Court of Human Rights and the International Criminal Court reinforce global legal
standards and provide mechanisms to uphold the rule of law across borders.
The European Court of Human Rights ECHR allows individuals from member states to
bring cases against their governments for human rights violations.
In Oliari and Others v. Italy 2015, for example, the European Court of Human Rights
ruled that Italyʼs lack of legal recognition for same-sex partnerships violated the
applicantsʼ rights under the European Convention on Human Rights. This decision
pressured Italy to reform its laws, illustrating how IGOs enforce human rights standards
and support the rule of law across Europe.
Similarly, the International Criminal Court ICC prosecutes individuals for grave offences
such as genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity, particularly when nationalEvaluate The View That The Spread Of Democracy, Liberal Economies And The Rule Of Law Are In Decline. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan4
courts are unable or unwilling to hold perpetrators accountable.
For example, in March 2025, former President of the Philippines Rodrigo Duterte was
arrested and transferred to the Hague for charges relate to his administrationʼs brutal
‘War on Drugsʼ during which thousands of alleged drug dealers and users were killed
without trial between 2016 and 2019.
Judgement
As with liberal economies, the most persuasive argument is that the rule of law is also in
decline.
Not only has the rule of law been undermined in a significant number of Western democracies,
China and Russia are two global great powers willing to use their influence to defend countries
that donʼt respect the rule of law.
Thought the rule of law remains strong in many countries, it has been proven that this can
quickly change and in a global context it is in decline.
Paragraph Three ➡ Democracy
For: Democracy Is In Decline
Along with the rule of law, it can also be argued that democracy is facing a serious decline in
various regions, known as the phenomenon of ‘democratic backslidingʼ. Both the rise of
populism and authoritarianism have presented significant threats.
After a decade of relatively successful democracy promotion in the 1990s, the 2000s showed
the difficulty of US efforts to impose democratic institutions on other countries, particularly in
the Middle East.
In both Iraq and Afghanistan, one of the stated aims of the invasion was to bring
democracy, however both efforts failed completely. Iraq descended into sectarian violence
and instability, with democratic institutions proving fragile in the face of internal divisions,
whilst Afghanistan saw the return of the Taliban immediately after US withdrawal in 2021,
showing the fragility of the democratic institutions.
In the 2010s, a number of strongman populist leaders in democracies significantly weakened
democratic institutions and eroded civil liberties to such an extent that they are now semi-
democratic regimes where one-party has a significant advantage in elections.
In India, Prime Minister Narendra Modiʼs government has faced criticism for eroding
democratic institutions, particularly in its treatment of religious minorities, suppression of
dissent and suppression of opposition media in the 2024 election.
Similarly, in Hungary Prime Minister Viktor Orbánʼs government has implemented a series of
reforms that have given it an advantage in elections, including appointing loyalists to key
judicial powers and suppressing critical media outlets and left-wing university courses.
Democracy is in decline across the world because this democratic backsliding is coupled with
the growing power of Russia, China and Iran, who have formed a non-democratic axis that
challenges US dominance and the promotion of democracy globally.
Against: Democracy Isnʼt In DeclineEvaluate The View That The Spread Of Democracy, Liberal Economies And The Rule Of Law Are In Decline. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan5
On the other hand, it can be argued that democracyʼs decline has been overstated. Democracy
remains the most common form of governance across the world. Over 60% of nations hold
regular elections, and in many countries, democratic institutions continue to function
effectively.
In Western Europe, Canada, Japan, and Australia, democratic governance remains robust,
with active political participation, free press, and protections for civil liberties.
Further, a number many countries which saw populist leaders have success in the 2010s
have since elected left-wing/liberal leaders who have better respected and protected
democratic institutions.
In 2022, Brazil elected Lula, a left-wing leader who prioritised environmental protection
and democratic norms, marking a shift from the populist right wing policies and rhetoric
of his predecessor, Jair Bolsonaro.
Lulaʼs administration has worked to rebuild trust in government institutions and
address social inequality to tackle the root causes of support for Bolsonaro.
Further, IGOs such as the United Nations and the European Union remain committed to
promoting democratic norms and free elections around the world.
The United Nations frequently deploys electoral assistance missions, providing technical
support and monitoring to ensure fair elections in countries undergoing democratic
transitions, such as its mission in Iraq in 2021. By supporting election integrity and
transparency, the UN helps build trust in new democracies and strengthens local
institutions.
The European Union promotes democracy through its European Instrument for Democracy
and Human Rights, which funds initiatives to protect human rights, foster free elections, and
strengthen civil society in partner countries. For instance, the EU provided extensive
support to Tunisia after the Arab Spring, aiding in the development of democratic
institutions and election monitoring.
Judgement
Overall, there has been significant democratic backsliding over the past two decades and
democracy is therefore in decline despite the efforts of some states and IGOs to protect it
globally.
Overall Argument
In conclusion, it is clear that the rule of law, liberal economies and democracy are in decline
since their heyday in the post-Cold War 1990s. They are being weakened in many countries and
their global reputation has been significantly damaged.
The 2008 financial crisis not only undermined the reputation of liberal economies, it also
created the deprivation that was a key condition for the rise of right wing populism in some
Western democracies, which has done significant damage both to democracy and to the rule of
law.
This democratic backsliding in Western democracies has been combined with the rise of China
and Russia as revisionist powers, which openly challenge the rule of law and democracy, whilst
proving that free market, liberal economics isnʼt the only path to economic development and
prosperity.Evaluate The View That The Spread Of Democracy, Liberal Economies And The Rule Of Law Are In Decline. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan6
Other Possible Essay Questions To Practice Adapting
This Plan To Answer
Evaluate the view that liberal values and economies are no longer important in global politics.
30
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
♪ TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explainedEvaluate The View That The Spread Of Democracy, Liberal Economies And The Rule Of Law Are In Decline. 30 Politics Explained Essay Plan7
