#separator:tab
#html:false
Pragmatism 1 - Overview   What does it reject Associations? Quote Linked to what? Criticisms	- Rejection of theory in favour of experience, flexible approach based on 'what works' - Associated with Burke and M. Oakeshott - 'to be a Conservative is to prefer the tried to the untried' M. Oakeshott - Preference of pragmatism linked to view on human nature: humans lack intellectual capacity to fully comprehend the complex reality of the world. Leading to abstract utopian ideals eg classless society - Critics argue pragmatism reveals a lack of political principle and encourages following rather than leading
Pragmatism 2 - traditional and one-nation conservative views   What do traditional conservatives (Burke) believe and what has thus survived? Burke: what causes chaos What should be preserved  Motto	- Traditional/one-nation conservatism both associated - For traditional conservatives, Burke, pragmatism is essential in envoking natural, evolutionary change which allowed the state to continue for it needs to adapt over time - Burke: radical which ends in inevitable chaos - Core societal features can be preserved - Change to conserve
C.S - Pragmatism 1951-64 - one-nation retainment	- Perhaps clearest example of one-nation conservative pragmatism with a series of admins recognising the success and popularity of Labour reforms -> pragmatically chose to retain them eg new welfare state and nationalised industries
Tradition - Burke -> Eg/unity -> prag	- Customs & institutions that have developed over time should be preserved - Burke -> tradition constitutes cumulative wisdom of the past -> customs/institutions are fitting as they have withstood the test of time -> shld be preserved for future gens - Eg monarchy promoting national pride and unity over centuries -> social stability/cohesion - View linked to pragmatism -> only natural, evolutionary change accepted - Provides a sense of identity and fosters security by providing sense of familiarity
Human imperfection (intro)    What kind of view do they have? incapable of what? Why does imperfection need to be kept in check? Thus conservatives stress: Ways they are flawed?	- Pessimistic view -> people are flawed and incapable of reaching absolute perfection - Human imperfection has to be kept in check due to the human capacity for evil ->Thus conservatives stress: 1. tough stance on law/order to deter criminals 2. national security very important in foreign policy - Flawed in 3 ways: morally, phycologically, intellectually
Imperfection - psycological   ___ and ___ crave what  -> premium order liberty raises? Hobbes':	- Limited and dependant  - Crave security and familiarity - Thus place premium on social order as order provides security and stability - In constrast, liberty raises change and uncertainty - Thomas Hobbes' argument: social order has to come before liberty
Imperfection - moral   naturally what?	- Humans morally imperfect -> naturally selfish and greedy - Criminal behaviour due to human nature rather than socio-economic factors - Robust law/order system that enforces sanctions on such behaviour only deterrent to moral imperfections
Imperfection - intellectual -> reality -> pragmatism	- Intellectual and reasoning skills limited - Not enough intellectual capacity to understand world's complex reality - Consequently, conservatives reject any overarching ideals that claim to predict the development of human society - Instead humans draw upon traditon and practical experience to determine their place in the world
Organic society 1 - Assumptions   What assumptions are made? -> people cannot exists ___ Humans accept ___ When are people truly free Without society where would we descend?	- Given the assumption that humans are dependent and security-seeking -> people cannot exist seperately from society or social groups - Society provides sense of security/purpose - Humans accept roles provided by society eg parent, neighbour, friend - People are truly free when they accept the value of societal ties -> without society would descend into atomism
Organic society 2 - main - healthy frame -> structured organs -> underpinned	- Idea of society as a living organism, all its parts work together ensuring a healthy frame - Internal elements of society have to be structured, like a living creature, with an interconnected set of organs -> represented by people who united can be more than just a collection of individuals - Society based on natural tendencies eg security/familiarity - Underpinned by hierarchy and authority 1. Hierarchy enables different classes to perform the different functions required (organs) 2. Reinforced by authority -> organically evolves operating top down and forging the different relationships
Authority - basic - best suited -> evolves -> provides	- Idea that people in higher positions are best suited to make decisions for the rest - Evolves naturally; work & households - Provides much needed security
Hierarchy - tiers -> organic -> justifies -> pat	- Belief that society is naturally organised into unequal tiers based on one's social status - Different groups perform different functions (organs) -> all essential to final structure - Such financial inequalities justified as the best rewards tend to be paired with the greatest responsibility - Encourages paternalism as a means to ensure social cohesion
Paternalism 1 - idea   How are people best equipped to do what? Duties? Burke arguments NA Inate	- Idea that government by people who are best equipped by virtue of their upbringing, class and inheritence - Those at top have duty to those at bottom  - Burke argued 'natural aristocracy' presided over society much like a father did over his family - Social elite provides better leadership due to inate, hereditary abilities
Paternalism - forms	- Soft -> when those who are reciepients give their consent - Hard -> when paternalism is imposed, regardless of consent/oppostion, more authoritarian manner
Michael Oakeshott - pragmatism quote	'to be a Conservative is to prefer the tried to the untried' M. Oakeshott
Paternalism - B. Disraeli - origins -> warned -> rich -> conc	- Origins of one-nation paternalism traces back to works of Benjamin Disraeli - Served PM 1874 - 1880 - In his literature he warned Britian dividing into 2 nations (rich/poor) -> social revolution more likely - Claimed could only be averted by privileged recognising their obligation towards less fortunate - Rich would help whilst preserving own advantages and social cohesion - As PM he translated paternalism into a series of limited social reforms
Paternalism - mid 1900s ->  economic policy -> who? -> allevieate -> obligation/however	- By mid 20th century one-nation paternalism had evolved into economic policy  - Moderate gov through 1950s/60s steered central course between gov intervention and free market - The combination was intended to alleviate some of the suffering in the lower classes whilst maintaining competition  - Gov had recognised the paternalistic obligation they owed - Gov also wanted to strengthen hierarchy through reducing the threats to social order
Libertarianism 1 - idea   What is it and what does it emphasise? What does it advocate? Emphasis what and rivals? When did it originate and influenced why whos work? Burke's ops on free market?	- Political philosophy emphasising the individual liberty - Advocates minimum state intervention in citizens lives - Emphasis on economic liberalisation -> rivals paternalism - Evident in conservative thinking since the late 1700s -> influenced by Adam Smith's arguments for econ liberalism - Eg Burke: advocated free market citing its efficiency and claiming intervention would damage potential prosperity
Libertarianism - modern   = Associated with who? Rejects and endorses what (3 things) Greatest threat and remedy Dissmiss what as inefficient?	- Libertarianism (modern) = liberal New Right = neo-liberalism - Associated Thatcher and Reagan in 80s - Neo-lib rejects state intervention -> champions free market -> opposes keynesian style management - Neo-liberals consider inflation greatest economic threat -> undermining consumer/business confidence -> use gov spending cuts to control monetary supply (Thatch/Reagan 80s) - Neo-libs also dismiss common-ownersip on grounds on inefficiency
Libertarianism - Neo-liberal objections to state welfare   Believe the state is a threat to what? Objections in part? Economic: Moral:	- Believe the state is a threat to individual liberty and thus should be restrained -> reduced social welfare - Objections in part moral/economic Economic: 1. State welfare = dependency culture, depriving self-respect -> by 80s neo-liberals claiming generations were already dependent on welfare (US/UK) -> undermining parental financial responsibility and therefore family   Moral: 2. Welfare policy disrupts property rights -> no legally acquired property (income too) should be transferred, without consent, from one individual to another -> tax revuenue used in funding legilised 'state robbery'
