#separator:tab
#html:false
Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679) - Key ideas   1. An ___ ____ 2. Humans are ___ 3.   Wrote __	Key ideas: 1. An ordered society should balance the human need to lead a free life 2. Humans needy, vunerable, easily led astray in attempts to understand world around them 3. 'State of nature'   - Wrote Leviathan -> absolute government and absolute obedience  needed for evasion of chaos (natural state of mankind)
Thomas Hobbes - State of nature   What has disastrous consequences? Hypothetical situation ___ :	- Freedom without order or authority -> disastrous consquences for society - Hypothetical situtation (state of nature): -> equality and freedom without any authority -> would be inevitable war and endless conflict -> fearful individuals would sacrifice some of their rights in return for order and security  -> they would enter a social contract with gov -> submit to authoritative government
Thomas Hobbes - Human nature   1. Humans ___ and ___ -> people ___ 2. Humans are easily what?	1. Humans needy and vunerable -> people will compete voilently for personal benefit (especially within the state of nature) 2. Humans easily led astray in attempts to comprehend world -> human reasoning limited and attempts to understand world distorted by self-interest
Edmund Burke (1729-97) - Key ideas - views on change and tradition   1. ___ should be ___ 2. Tradition & ___   Name of work	- Traditional conservative 1. Change should be made cautiously mindful of delicate balance within organic society 2. Tradition & empiricism should be respected as they represent practices passed down from one generation to the next - Considered founder of modern conservatism by many with ideas outlined in work Reflections on the Revolution in France
Edmund Burke   What was his criticism? Argued what would result? Ideas on society Ideas on reform	- Criticised French revolution as trying to found a new society based on abstract principles (eg liberty) rather than lessons from past - Argued such drastic changes could only lead to chaos - Society represents an organism that should only be chanaged gently to preserve stability and cohesion - Reform should be pragmatic and founded in tradition & empiricism
Edmund Burke - Tradition   What can tradition provide and what duties are in place?	- Contunuing respect for tradition nurtures social continuity and stability  - Each generation has an obligation to pass the accumulated wisdom on to the next - Provides a historical identity offering familiarity and pride
Michael Oakeshott   2 key ideas   What was his main work on	1. People's actions should be guided by pragmatism, rather than ideology 2. Theories / ideologies oversimplify comlex situations   - Main work on human imperfection and pragmatism
M. Oakeshott - Core  Why can't modern society be understood? How are constructs compounded?	- Modern society both unpredictable/complex -> cannot be understood in abstract theories - Attempts to construct these theories far too simple -> compounded by human imperfection (intellectual- not able to comprehend complex reality)
Oakeshott's endorsement of pragmatism   Can deliver what? Maintains? Flexible to what?	1. Can deliver the best interests of society without overstepping limits of public acceptence (not radical) 2. Maintains social stability and cohesion by avoiding dramatic change 3. Flexible to changing social realities
Ayn Rand (1905-82) - Key ideas    People should x People should y	1. People should pursue happiness as their highest moral aim 2. People should work hard to achieve a life of purpose & productiveness
Ayn Rand - Core    What rose up when causing ? Name of political philosophy and what 2 things did it endorse? What resulted from restriction? Thus rejected what?	- Rise of 20th century communism led many to reconsider role of state in lives of individuals - Resonded with objectivism -> libertarian philosophical system endorsing virtues of rational self interests and laissez-faire capitalism - Claimed any attempt to restrict an individual's actions corrupted their ability to be productive in society (undermining their use of reason) - Thus rejected gov welfare on grounds that it relies on the implicit threat of force (taxation)
Robert Nozick (1938-2002)   Key ideas   Individuals cannot be treated as what? Own what? Which political stance	1. Individuals in society cannot be treated as a thing or used against their will as a resource 2. Individuals own bodies, talents and labour 3. Neo-liberal
Robert Nozick - Core   What political philosophy did he hold and help? What did he argue for? What did he think of humans and their time? What conclusion did he reach?	- Right-wing libertarian -> important in development of New Right - Argued for a rights-based libertarian system and a minimal state - Humans are not simply a means to an end and should not be exploited for their resources (labour/time) - Believed people deserved their liberty, rights and rewards resulting from their labour - Reached conclusion that taxes to fund welfare were immoral
Robert Nozick   Why he thought taxes levied to fund welfare was immoral	1. They amount to a form of forced labour imposed on the individuals by the state 2. They treat individuals as a resource to further the goals of equality
Robert Nozick on the state - 'night watchman'	- Claimed the only morally justifiable state was one with powers limited to protecting people from violence, fraud and theft
Key thinkers within Conservatism (7)	1. Thomas Hobbes - Traditional conservative - State of Nature - Leviathan - Authority and the importance of social order, as demonstrated by the state of nature - Humans are needy, vunerable and easily led astray in attempts to understand the world around them - Humans are greedy and will compete violently for personal gain, especially in a state of nature   2. Robert Nozick - Neo-liberal - Taxation to fund welfare is immoral and uneconomical - Individuals should not be used as a resource to further the goals of equality, they should own their bodies, talents and labour - Night watchman   3. Edmund Burke - Traditional conservative - Reflections on the Revolution in France - Change should be slow, pragmatic and evolutionary as to not undermine the delicate balance of organic society - Emphasis on tradition and the fact it is the duty of each generation to pass traditional customs, practices and institutions from one generation to the next -> fosters unity and a sense of identity   4. Michael Oakeshott - Change should be made in a pragmatic manner - Modern society is far too complex to be understood using ideological theory -> attempts to construct models are far too simplistic and are compounded by human intellectual imperfection   5. Ayn Rand - Libertarian - Objectivism -> libertarian philosophical system endorsign the virtues of rational self interests and laissez-faire capitalism - Claimed any attempt to restrict an individual's actions corrupted their ability to be rational and productive in society -> thus rejected welfare on the grounds that it relies on the implicit threat of force   6. Benjamin Disraeli - One-nation conservative - PM between 1874 - 1880 - Warned of Britian splitting into 2 nations, the rich and the poor - Called for paternalistic attidutes towards from the economic elite for the poor due to the growing social mobility for a revolution - Embraced a number of limited social reform such as the Second Reform Act and the Sale of Food and Drugs Act   7. Margeret Thatcher - New-Right - Emphasis on traditional values, citing the need to return Britian to 'victorian values'  - Section 28 and the prohibitation of homosexuality - Advocate for monetarism, economic system prodominantly using cuts in public expenditure to reduce inflationary pressures - Privitisation policy alongside cutting trade-union powers
