#separator:tab
#html:false
Why do neoliberals reject paternalism?	Because they want to reduce the size of the state, to create a more dynamic and efficeint economy Government intervention (a key aspect of one nation paternalism) undermines price mechanism, resulting in economic inefficency. Neoliberal egotistical individualism challenges paternalistic obligations to others. Stressing self help, individual responsibility and personal initiative, neoliberals suggest welfare programmes promote a culture of dependency and undermine free market
How do conservatives view society?	Conservatives see society as organic – a living thing which passes on core values through the ages.    As such, society is formed by the principles of tradition, authority and principled morality.     The dominant pattern in conservatism has been for society to be a comforting influence for family and group life.    However neo-liberals have favoured individual autonomy over the cherishing of society.
Why do neoliberals dismiss government intervention?	Creates inflation - undermines business confidence and inhibits business activity. Distorts the price mechanism - inefficiencyRedistribution diminishes incentives to work and invest. - dependency, complacencyAs paternalistic objectives can obly be advanced through the agency of the state, it leads ot the growth of arbitrary state power and the erosion of freedom (The Road to Serfdom, Hayek)
What do traditional conservatives believe in? - 3 key values	Defending the established based on a commitment to organicism, hierarchy and paternalism
How do traditional conservatives regard society?	As an organic entity with complex interconnections and relationships Any changeds to one part will affect all the other parts, possibly in unforseen and negative ways. Radical changes should be avoided.
What is society based on for traditional conservatives?	Tried and tested instituions like the family, church and monarchy. Social arrangements are held in place by custom and tradition - the accumulated wisdom and experience of the past to maintain  a society bound togther by loyalty, affection and duty. Reform has to be pragmatic and prudent
What do traditional conservatives think about ideolgical frameworks?	They can only lead to disaster - e.g. Jacobins in the French revolution and Bolsheviks in 1917. Such as approach is not based on experience and introduces drastic changesThis is what Edmund Burke argued in his Reflections on the revolution in France - dangerous for order snd stability
What does Noblesse oblige mean?	a French phrase that encapsulates the idea that nobility and privilege bring with them social responsibilities, notably the duty and obligation to care for those less fortunate.
What is one nation conservatism?	An updated version of traditioanl conservatism, emerged in response to laissez faire capitalism and 19th century industrialisation.
How has the modern conservative party been influenced by one nation conservatism?	David Cameron argued that a new 'compassionate conservatism' would underpin his government. Theresa May called for a creation of a 'shared society' that would focus 'more on the responsibilities we have to one another' and respect 'the bonds of family, community, citizenship and strong instituions that we share as a union of people and nations. Theresa May identified 7 'burning injusticies' - e.g. racism, gender pay gap. Boris Johnon - 'levelling up' for the north.
What is The New Right formed of?	neo-liberalism – a modernised version of classical liberalism, based on a commitment to the free-market economy, the minimal state, and individual freedom and atomistic individualism neo-conservatism – principally concerned with the fear of social framgmentation - commitment to law and order, traditional values, tough on public morality
Neoliberal and neoconservative features of Thatcherism	NeoliberalNeocon                            Tight control of money supply through monetarist policies to control inflation and so encourage economic activity and investment     Privatisation of state-controlled industries (gas, electricity, water) on grounds of freedom, competition and efficiency     Promotion of free market through policies of deregulation affecting London’s financial sector – the ‘Big Bang’ (1986)     Belief that trade union power was endangering UK’s economic competitiveness led to anti-union legislation   Highly influenced by Hayek's road to serfdom - hatred of collectivism              Defence of traditional values including support for heterosexual marriage and the nuclear family     Strong law-and-order policies based on support for police and punitive criminal justice     Opposition to permissive attitudes and ‘alternative’ lifestyles led to Section 28 (1988), a law prohibiting promotion of homosexuality     Determination to protect public morality led to government regulation of the UK video market, following concerns about ‘video nasty’ horror films
How are one traditional and one nation conservatives united on society?	Both see society as 'organic' - society is more important than any invididual parts. United on the belief in human imperfection. Therefore paternalism, hierarchy and authority is necessary
That four things do neoliberals call for?	A minimal stateSelf-reliant individuals capable of making rational decisions in their own interestsThe rejection of collectivism The elimination of government intervention
How are neoconservatism and traditional conservatism similar and different on society?	Both believe in authority and the need to preserve societyHowever, neoconservatism is more authoritarian, because it seeks to strenghen society by asserting authority and social discipline, rather than through social reform and welfare measures
Why do neoconservatives and neoliberals both want reduced state intervention?	human imperfection - To 'stamp out' a culture of dependency and fecklessness, which is encouraged by a 'rights culture.'rationalism - Neoliberals would say that if humans are left to their own devices, it will unleash their rational instincts and allow them to maximise their self interest - profit.
What do neoconservatives think about law and order?	Liberalism and a permissive society leads to increased crime and anti social behaviour. Authority, patriarchy and hierarchy - a strong state with increased police powers and punishments can be used to tackle this.
Why do neoconservatives reject a 'permissive culture'	Reject a permissive culture which allows a 'free for all' where 'anything goes'. Unacceptable to religionDestablising and undermines social cohesion.Margaret Thatcher advocated for 'Victorian values' and organisations such as the Moral Majority campaigned for traditional values
How are neoconservatives and paleoconservatives different?	Paleoconservatism differs from neoconservatism in opposing free trade and promoting republicanism. They are isolationist, not interventionist.  Paleoconservatives see neoconservatives as imperialists and themselves as defenders of the republic.[20][21]
Are conservatives united on human imperfection?	Most Conservatives, except neoliberals believe that human beings are morally, psychologically and intellectually imperfect. This is why they require hierarchical structures and crave an organic society and community to benefit all.
How to traditional and one nation conservatives differ on their justifications for paternalism?	traditional (an authoritarian approach, the state knows what is best so the people must do what they are told) one-nation (there is an obligation on the wealthy to look after those who are unable to look after themselves) and why it is rejected by New Right
What does Britannia Unchained tell us about the British work ethic? What is their prescription?	"According to Britannia Unchained, ""The British are among the worst idlers in the world. We work among the lowest hours, we retire early and our productivity is poor. Wheras Indian children aspire to be doctors or businessmen, the British are more interested  in football and pop music' - Raab. Also written by Truss, Kwarteng, Patel. (Free Enterprise Group) Argued for exempting small bsuinesses from paying the minimum wage Urged that the definition of fair dismissal would be widened to encompass inadequate performance"
