#separator:tab
#html:false
According to Oakeshott, 'to be a Conservative is [...]	According to Oakeshott, 'to be a Conservative is to prefer the tried to the untried'
What did Edmund Burke say about tradition?	he famously stated that society was a ‘partnership not only between those who are living, but between those who are living, those who are dead and those who are to be born’. Each generation has a solemn duty to safeguard and pass on the accumulated wisdom of tradition to the next generation.
What did Disraeli warn (1804-1881)?	One nation paternalistic conservatism can be traced back to Benjamin Disraeli. Disraeli warned that Britain was dividing into two nations - The rich and the poor. Increased likelihood of social revolution. “two nations between whom there is no intercourse and no sympathy, who are as ignorant of each other’s habits, thoughts and feelings, as if they were dwellers in different zones, or inhabitants of different planets”
How did Disraeli believe that social revolution could be averted?	Privileged in society recognise their obligation to look after the less fortunate. This would help preserve their advantages, but also alleviate hardships of working class and strenghen social cohesion and stability of nation. Blending of self interest with principle
How did Benjamin Disraeli feel about capitalism?	Felt that capitalism encouraged egotistical individualism, undermined social responsibility and threatened to split Britain into two nations - rich and poor.If left unaddressed, the division would lead to class conflict, declining sense of community, national idenitity and possibly revolution
What are the three main features of Disraeli's one nation conservatism?	Maintenance of traditional institions - e.g. Monarchy and Church. Provides stability, offers focus for national pride and loyalty. Imperliaism - source of national pride, global influenceReforms to introduce conditions for the working class - remove the possibility of revolution
What did Harold Macmillian advocate for?	A 'middle way' between capitalism and socialist collectivism.          Combined ‘state ownership, regulation or control of certain aspects of economic activity with the drive and initiative of private enterprise’.  Economic policy to 'bring together Disraeli's two nations into a single economic entity'
Why did Milton Friedman disapprove of Keynesian policies?	Keynesian policies to stimulate demand create inflation by encouraging governments to print too much money or provide too much credit. His solution, known as monetarism, is for government to reduce inflation by controlling the money supply through cuts in public spending. Both Thatcher and Raegan persued monetarist policies to tackle inflation. They believed that the market would address the problem of mounting unemployment
What were Thomas Hobbes' key ideas (1588-1679)	Order - an ordered society should balance the human need to lead a free life. Social breakdown and civil war are the biggest dangers to society - therefore law and order (even by a tyrant) above all other principlesHumans are needly, vulnerable and easily led astray in atttempts to understand the world around them In Leviathan (1651), Hobbes argued for total obedience to absolute government, as the only alternative was chaos.
What would happen in Hobbes' state of nature?	Where there is no Leviathan, humans would exhibit a 'restless desire' for power,(human imperfection) leading to conflict and a state of nature where there is a 'war of all against all'. - where life is nasty, brutish and short
How do individuals avoid a state of nature according to Hobbes?	Fearful, self interested and rational people would sacrifice many of their rights and enter into a social contract with a leviathan that can guarentee security.
How does Hobbes see human nature?	Egotistical and selfish - People compete violently to maximise their benefits. Easily led astray - humans are intellectually imperfect Strong government is the only way of restraining these threats
According to Thomas Hobbes, ‘How could a state be governed, or protected in its foreign relations if [...] according to his [...]?’	According to Thomas Hobbes, ‘How could a state be governed, or protected in its foreign relations if every individual remained free to obey or not to obey the law according to his private opinion?’
According to Edmund Burke, ‘It is with infinite caution that any man ought to venture upon [...] which has answered in any tolerable degree for ages the common purposes of society, or on building it up again without having [...]	According to Edmund Burke, ‘It is with infinite caution that any man ought to venture upon pulling down an edifice which has answered in any tolerable degree for ages the common purposes of society, or on building it up again without having the model and patterns of approved utility before his eyes.’
What were Edmund Burke's (1729-97) key ideas?	Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790)      Political change should be undertaken with great caution - mindful of the delicate balance in an organic society. Custom and tradition prioritisedTradition and empiricm - should be respected because they are knowledge passed down between generations. Accepted 'change in order to conserve' - society had to have some flexibility or it would not surive. E.g. Ancien regime.
Why did Edmund Burke not like the French revolution?	Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790)      Attempt to create a new society based on abstract principles (e.g. liberty and equality) rather than lessons of the past.  Traditions that are not well established could only lead to chaos and tyranny. State is like an organism that can only be reformed by gentle 'pruning'. Reform should be limited and cautious. Revolutuionary change threatens to cut off society's 'root's'
According to Edmund Burke,  ‘we procure reverence to our civil institutions on the principle which Nature teaches us to revere [...]: on account of their [...], and on account of [...]’.	According to Edmund Burke,  ‘we procure reverence to our civil institutions on the principle which Nature teaches us to revere individual men: on account of their age, and on account of those from whom they are descended’.
What are Micheal Oakeshott's (1901-1990) main ideas? What does he see about human nature?	Rationalism in Politics (1962) and On Human Conduct (1975).      Humans are imperfect - do not have mental faculties to make sense of complex modern world Theories and ideologies oversimplify complex situations Therefore actions should be guided by pragmatism and practical experience, rather than ideology
What did Oakeshott think about the Bolsheviks and Fascists?	Clear examples of misguided human rationalism in politics. A foolish oversimplification
What did Oakeshott thank about rationalism?	Rationalist politics is based on abstract principles and systems of ideological thought.          Rationalist politics leads to destruction and the creation of a new political and social order.    Parliamentary instituions devoped pragmatically and have existed for centuries
Why does Oakeshott believe in a pragmatic approach?	can deliver what is in the best interests of the people without overstepping the limits of public acceptance     maintains social stability and cohesion by emphasising moderation, cautious change where necessary, and a sense of   historical continuity     is flexible, reflecting complex and shifting social realities, unlike rigid theories and ideologies which encourage dogmatic decision-making.
What are Ayn Rand 's(1905-82)main ideas?	The Fountainhead (1943) and Atlas Shrugged (1957).       Objectivism –this advocates the virtues of rational self-interest as the highest moral aim. People should work hard to achieve purpose and productivity. Achieves the best outcomes for society. She called it 'the virtue of selfishness' or 'ethical egoism'    Freedom - she called herself a 'radical for capitalism' and called for 'a full, pure uncontrolled, unregulated laissez faire economy'. This achieves the best outcomes
What did Ayn Rand think about regulation?	Rand hated it          Rand referred to this opposition to external coercion of the individual as the ‘non-aggression principle’.     Any attempt, said Rand, to control or regulate an individual’s actions corrupted the capacity of that person to work freely as a productive member of society, mainly by undermining his or her practical use of reason Hence why low taxation
Why did Ayn Rand condemn alturism?	Because it creates an 'artificial' sense of obligation and expectation, and did not accord with an individual's rational self interest.
What were Robert Nozick's (1938-2002) main ideas?	Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974), - minimal state       Libertarianism–based on Kant’s idea that individuals in society cannot be treated as a thing, or used against their will as a resource. They are means in of themselves    Self-ownership – individuals own their bodies, talents, abilities and labour.  Concern over the role of the state and wealth distribution. Individuals should have as much liberty 'taxation is theft'
Why does Nozick support Kant's ideas	The assumption that individuals are inviolable end in themselves, Nozick argued, gives them rights to their lives, liberty and the rewards resulting from their labour. According to Nozick, these rights act as ‘side-constraints’ on the actions of others by setting limits on how a person may be treated.For example, an individual cannot be forced against his or her will to work for another person’s purposes (even if those purposes are good). - hence why 'taxation is theft or a form of forced labour''
Why are taxes immoral according to Nozick?	they amount to a type of forced labour imposed on the individual by the state     they treat individuals as a means or resource to further the goals of equality and social justice and, in so doing, violate the principle that humans should be seen as better ends in themselves.    Therefore, the only state that can be morally justified is a 'nightwatchman' state
Why did Nozick believe that taxation violated self ownership?	Taxation gives others an entitlement to reap the benefits of an individuals Labour. This makes taxation a form of slavery. Citizens entitled to benefits become partial owners of the individual since they have partial property rights over his or her labour.
What did Nozick think about the state telling people what to do?	Anything more extensive than the minimal state also compromises self-ownership. For example, a state that regulates what people eat, drink, or smoke interferes with their right to use their self- owned bodies as they want.
According to Ayn Rand, the New York Skyline is the...	Will of man made visible
