#separator:tab
#html:false
Why did John Major lose in 1997	"Labour SuccessTory Failure                 New Deal windfall taxAbolishing clause 4 Popular spending commitments - increase funding on NHS. 'Tough on crime, tough on the causes of crime'. ""New Labour because Britain deserves better""Labour adopted the phrase 'Cool Britannia' To reflect the new direction of the country. Appealed to many voters and demographics. Landslide majority of 179. 43.2% of the vote.    Tony Blair courts the right media.    John Major no longer has a majority. Minority government due to resignations and rebellions. Tory party was very divided -  John Major tried to pass the Maastricht Treaty in 1992. But this led to the Maastricht Rebellions. John Major threatened the rebels with a general election.  ERM failure. Black Wednesday - September 1992. Cash for questions - Neil Hamilton took money from Al Fayed Huge divisions over Europe 'bastards'Sexual scandals and sleaze allegations. ' Failed to appeal to voters."
Why did Ian Duncan Smith and William Hague lose elections in 2001 and 2005	They failed to distance themselves sufficiently from Thatcherism, which the public identified with a now discredited pastObsession with immigration, law and order meant it appeared outdated. The party failed to appeal to a diverse societyTheresa May called it the 'nasty party' in 2002
According to Peter Pulzer,[...] is the basis of British party politics - all else is embellishment and detail.   When did he say this?	According to Peter Pulzer,Class is the basis of British party politics - all else is embellishment and detail.   When did he say this?  1967
What is the Daily Mail's Daily readership	Daily readership of 2 million. Most read newspaper in the UK.
How many people tuned in to watch the Johnson Corbyn leadership debate on ITV in 2019?	6.7 million viewersPeople place more importance on leadership debates over policies and manifestos
Breaking point   How did the Brexiteers create a fear that we would be overrun by immigrants?	Misleading claims made that Turkey would be joining the EU and we would be overrun by migrants
Why did Theresa May lose her majority?	Conservatives achieved 318 seats, short of a majority. She ruled out having an election, then decided to call one. Presidential style campaign with a leader who doesnt like media interviews. She looked a bit miserable (Maybot) , whilst Corbyn seemed Lively. Dodged the TV debatesUnderestimating the opposition - Corbyn resonated with young people with his anti austerity messagePolicies - U turn on 'dementia tax', ending the 'triple lock'.  not very 'strong and stable
What was the New Labour New Deal?	£5 billion one off windfall tax on utilities companies To pay for youth employment
How large was the budget deficit in 2010?	£163 billion since the start of the financial crisis
How short were the Conservatives of an overall majority in 2010?	20 seats short of an overall majority Only achieved 36.1% of the vote
Was 'Bigotgate' an important factor as to why Brown lost the election?	Perhaps - the media seized it. It shows that a slip up on the broadcast media can cost you an electionBut, Brown was already behind in the opinion polls and Labour held Rochdale.Gordon Brown apologised to her - embarassing.
What are floating voters?	voters with no long term party loyalties, and vote for different parties in different elections
What are the three reasons for partisan dealignment?	Increased education - encouraged voter to question party loyalties and take policy/valence issues more seriouslyImpact of the media - Voters have access to a variety of political information. Ideological change - Shifts in parties policies since the 1980s have alienated tradional supporters and appealed to othersLabour won middle England in 1997.
What are the three causes of class dealignment?	Changing class system - Manual workforce has shrunk (from 58% in 1961 to 29% in 2013).  Cross-class locations - Social class has become less clear cut. Decline in trade union membership and rise of home ownership Embourgeoisement - Growing affluence has encouragd some working class voters to think of themselves as middle class
How does the 2019 general election show class dealignment?	Conservatives outperformed labour across all social grades. They did better amongst working class voters than they did amongst affluent voters (red wall)
In 2017, Labour held [...]/100 constituencies with the most working class households. In 2019, this fell to [...]/100.	In 2017, Labour held 72/100 constituencies with the most working class households. In 2019, this fell to 53/100.
What percentage of 18-24 year olds backed remain?	75% of 18-24 year olds voted to remain
What percent of over 65s voted to leave?	60% of over 65s voted leave
What are valence issues?	Valence issues are issues where there is common agreement - e.g. economic prsperity. Voters decide which party they trust to deliver a valence issue. (Affluence, Austerity and Electoral Change, Whitely, 2013) argues that recent general elections have been determined by valence factors. Voters valuate based on credibility, percieved governing competence rather than ideologies or policy options. E.g. many liked labour manifesto but could not trust Corbyn to deliver.
What was Thatcher's 1983 majority size?	from 44 to 144 seats - largest since Clement AtleeWon 42.4% of the vote.
What was Thatcher's 1979 majority and how many seats did she win?	44 seat majority. 43.9% of the vote
Why was Thatcher able to gain such a huge majority in 83?	SDP-liberal coalition achieved 25% of the vote. Fragmented left wing vote. Micheal Foot radicalism led to the SDP breakaway. Party was in internal chaos.  1983 manifesto called longest suicide note in history. Unilateral nuclear disarment. Boom from North Sea OilMedia & The War in Falkalnds - Personality cult around Thatcher - The Iron Lady. Housewife. Wider context - Falklands War boosted Thatchers satisfaction rate to 59%. The economy had returned to growth
What impact did the Edstone and the Bacon Sandwich have on the  Labour election campaign?	Seemed gimicky, made the public feel like they were not serious
How many 'red wall' seats did the Tories win in 2019?	Conservatives won 33/63 red wall seats. Blyth Valley elected a Conservative for the first time in it's 69 year history
Why did David Cameron get into trouble over Andy Coulson?	David Cameron's former director of communications was sentenced to prison for phone hacking whilst at the news of the world.
How are Blair and Murdoch related?	Blair is the godfather of Murdoch's daughter Grace
Why was the Leveson inquiry launched?	Because The Guardian found that in 2011, The News of the World hacked the phone of murdered teenager Millie Dowler. The report called for stronger regulation. Regulation is not really effective, the Independent press standards organisation was called a 'toothless tiger'
Which newspaper exposed the Windrush Scandal?	The Guardian
Why might it be argued that the IPSO is ineffective?	(1) Not independent Lord Faulks, former Conservative member of the House of Lords is chair of Ipso (Independent Press Standards Organisation). Shows lack of independence.(2) - Fails to regulate According to Hacked Off, IPSO has likely had more than 50,000 claims brought to it in the last five years. Of them, IPSO has presided over zero investigations, zero fines, and zero arbitration claims.  It has, however, lobbied on behalf of press interests.  But it has completely failed to regulate.It is also 'owned and controlled by the very newspapers it is supposed to regulateFailed to protect minority groups and victims of false headlines(3) Self regulation - Newspapers can 'opt out' e.g. FT and Guardian
What Lobbying Story did Channel 4's Dispatches Programme break?	In 2010 Former labour transport sec Stephen Byers said to a reporter from Channel 4's Dispatches programme, who claimed to represent a lobbying firm that he was 'Like a cab for hire'Geoff Hoon, former defence sec told the reporter that he wanted to use connections for something that 'bluntly makes money'
Which newspaper broke the Owen Patterson Scandal?	The Sunday Times
What was the Hackney Gazettes Hidden Homeless Campaign?	Originally run over five weeks last year, the ‘Hidden Homeless’ campaign featured a series of reports on the 2,700 families without a permanent home in Hackney, London. Led by investigative reporter Emma Youle, the Hackney Gazette’s campaign told the stories of families forced to reside indefinitely in the squalid conditions of ‘temporary’ accommodation due to the lack of social housing in the borough. Through her reporting Youle revealed that the local council pays £35 million in room bills without investing in the permanent housing stock that is so desperately needed. Local news can act as a check on government power
How did the Yorkshire post scrutinise the Conservatives in 2019?	Gained national attention after publishing a story about a boy being treated on the floor of Leeds general infirmary.
How many people watched the BBC debate between Brown, Cameron and Clegg in 2010?	10.3 million views, demonstrating the importance of the media in improving democracy Arguably had an impact, as Clegg and Cameron, who performed best in the debate went in to government.  (Cleggmania)But Brown only won 29% of the vote
How much did turnout amongst 18-24 year olds increase in 2017? What percentage of them voted for Corbyn?	"By 16%.60% of them voted Corbyn#forthemany"
What did the Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee conclude in 2019?	"""Democracy is at risk from the malicious and relentless targeting of citizens with disinformation and personalised 'dark adverts' from unidentifiable sources, delivered throgh social media"""
What are dark adverts?	Used to appeal to the prejudices and fears of voters.
What did Cambridge Analytica do	In 2014, Harvested information from Facebook to build a system that could profile voters to target them with personalised political advertisements. AggregateIQ, a Canadian analytics firm worked on digital advertising for Vote Leave
What proportion of media circulation is controlled by just three companies?	83%Powerful figures like Murdoch, Lord Rothermere are able to control the political agenda and influence public opintiion
How did Laura Kuenssburg mislead the public on economic policy?	Promoted austeriy policy by using household metaphors to discuss national debt in 2020. Said that the state had 'maxed out' it's credit card
Why was The News of The World Shut down?	The News of the World hacked the voicemail of murdered teenager Millie Dowler. It had given the parents false hope that she was still alive.The outcry from the British public contributed to the closure of The News of the World and led to the levison inquiry into phone hacking and ethics in British media.
Why did Chris Byrant MP have a photo in his underpants exposed by the News of the World	He questioned Rebekah Brooks whether she ever paid police. She said 'yes'. He had his phone hacked by the News of the World, who exposed a photo of him in his underpants, from the gay dating site Gaydar.
What is IPSO?	Independent Press Standards OrganisationThe Editors' Code deals with issues such as accuracy, invasion of privacy, intrusion into grief or shock and harassment.  Has the power to issue fines
Which 2 newspapers 'opted out' from IPSO regulation?	The FT and The Guardian Prefer to have their own complaints system
What is the monthly readership of the Sun and Daily Mail? (2017)	According to National Readership Survey (2017), The Sun has a monthly online readership of 30.2 millionThe Mail online has a readership of 29.6.
Essay plan: Are traditional media sources now becoming increasingly irreleveant?	ForAgainst                 Print media is in decline in the UK with readership continuing to fall.The daily readership of the print media declined from 21.9 million in 2010 to 10.4 million in 2018 - an overall fall of 52.5%. Print media is still dominated by a small number of papers with a wide readership, while print media has transformed it's business model onine to maintain readership. The Sun and Daily Mail online both have a total monthly readership of 60 millionPrint media has limited reach with younger voters and voters from the C2DE class groupings41% of ABC1 people access printed papers as a source of news. This falls to 34% in C2DE class groupingsPrint media has much wider reach with older voters and from the ABC1 class categories, who have higher levels of voter turnoutThe explosion in the number to access broadcast mesia means it is easier for people to avoid political news and people can get their news from a variety of sourcesBroadcast media remains the most important source of political information for the UK public and continues to be dominated by a small number of stations.Broadcast media is being challenged by online media, including social media, especially with young voters and ethnic minoritiesMuch of the broadcast media has moved online and the BBC is the most used site for UK news, maintaining its position of dominace.  Since 2013, the influence of social media has risen rapidly, especially with young peopleThe influence of social media is exaggerated - it is just changing howt he public accesses the news and not who it gets its news from
Why are exit polls accurate?	Do not show how many people will vote for each party but show how many seats each party will win. Predicted that Cameron and Johnson would gain majorities and May would lose hers
Why did polling companies incorrectly predict a hung parliament in 2015?	Independent Inquiry established by the British Polling Councilfound that polling companies spoke to too many Labour voters and not enough Conservative votersthey did not interview enough older people.Incorrectly predicated hung parliament when there was a Tory majority of 12 (36.9% of vote)
How did Opinion Polls incorrectly predict the outcome of the EU referendum?	Opinion polls are usually presented with a ±3% margin for accuracy. In 2016, 18 previous polls had found that Remain had an average 3.4% point lead over Leave. Leave won the referendum by 3.8% points, showing that opinion polls can get the verdict wrong, whilst being within the margin of error
Essay plan - Do opinion polls have a positive impact on democracy?	For Against                 Opinion polls provide a key channel for poltical communication, informing political parties about public opinion. E.g. Labour 2017 used opinion polls to determine public backed nationalisation of Railways, Freezing retirement homes and building council homes.  E.g. 2019 Tories alligned with policiy isue polls with 'Get Brexit Done', spending pledges on Police, NHS and Education (help break red wall)Parties currently using public opinion to shape policy - E.g. Tories and Illegal Migration Bill, Criminalising Laughing Gas, Innaccurate polling can lead to parties making the wrong decision When May called election in April 2017, the average Conservative lead in the polls was 17%. The final result was a 2.4% lead and 8 seats short of overall majorityDavid Cameron would not have held referendum if polls showed leave was more popular. Calaghan delayed calling election in 78, based on polling data. Wiped out in 79In 2012, Osbourne uturned on unpopular measures, including VAT on hot foods, VAT on static carvans, fuel tax rise. Called 'omnishambles' budget and made government look bad Polling can inform public debate and encourage participation, especially when it is a close contest.Reports that election was close in 2010, 2015 and 2017 all meant an increase in turnout from the previous election Media becomes obsessed with voting intentions and reporting focuses on a 'horse race style' commentary on who is winning rather than interrogating the issues and policies. A study by Cardiff University showed that in the last week of the 2015 election, 22.7% of all media coverage was devoted to potential winners and losers, reducing the space for policy and scrutinyUse public opinion to hold government to account 2012 - Osbourne uturned on a 3p rise in tax on fuel in response to pressure from polling figures and backbenchers. Theresa May reversed her policy to make elderly pay more for their social care, nicknamed the 'dementia tax'Polling can be inaccurate and distort the outcomes. Many opinion polls speculated that there would be a hung Parliament and Labour would be forced to enter coalition with SNP. Fears about breakup of the union might have led more people to vote Conservativedata1data2
What proportion of media coverage was devoted to election outcomes, prior to the 2015 general election	A study by Cardiff University showed that in the last week of the 2015 election, 22.7% of all media coverage was devoted to potential winners and losers, reducing the space for policy discussion and scrutiny
Conservative campaign poster with Miliband in Alex Salmond's pocket   Why might this have frightened people?	Many would have thought that Milliband in power would lead to the breakup of the union.  So they voted Tory
Why was Laura Kuenssberg accused of bias by the Labour party over her Corbyn interview	inaccurately reported Jeremy Corbyn’s views about shoot-to-kill policies in the aftermath of the terror attacks in Paris, according to the BBC Trust.Took his position in the wrong context. He said that he did not think the police should 'shoot to kill' but not in the context of a terrorist attack
Why was the BBC seen to have misled the public over austerity? Why was Kuenssburg criticised??	BBC published a 'thematic review' on their coverage of taxation, public spending, government borrowing and debt. - Found to have breeched their impartiality guidelinesFound that many journalists lack an understanding of 'basic econonomics'. Believe all debt is bad‘The claim from Laura Kuenssberg in 2020 that the government’s ‘credit card’ was ‘maxed out’ sparked complaints. Household analogies are dangerous and distort the truth. They support the rights position on spending cuts
Why did BBC, Gary Lineker and the Tories get into a row?	Lineker likened the clampdown on immigration language to '1930s Germany'Ministers like Penny Mordaunt criticised Linkeker and claimed he breached impartiality. He was taken off hosting duties for MOTD - triggered walkout by other BBC employees as other commentators refused to work.Public outcry meant that Lineker was reinstated
Which 3 companies dominate 83% of the UK Newspaper market?	News UK, DMGT plc and Reach PLC
What percentages of the press support the tories and what percent support labour?	In 201864% of print media support the Tories22% support Labour
Why was Richard Sharp called to resign from his role as the chairman of the BBC?	Richard Sharp helped Boris Johnson obtain a £800,000 loan,. Boris Johnson named him as the government's preferred candidate for the BBC chairman role.Johnson and Sharp failed to disclose the loan. Sharp is a major Tory party donor and was on the board of the Centre for Policy Studies. He was friends with Sunak at  Goldman Sachs
Why did Emily Maitlis criticise the BBCs relationship with the Tory party?	Former newsnight presenter Emily Maitlis accused Sir Robbie Glib of being an 'active agent of the Conservative party' Glib is a member of the BBC Board - acting as an arbiter of impartiality. According to the FT, Glib attempted to block the appointment of journalists he considers damaging to government relations. Glib helped found the rightwing GB news channel and was communications director (spin doctor) under Theresa May
Why was Emily Maitlis accused of breaking impartiality rules?	Former Newsnight reporter was declared by the BBC to have 'breached the standards of impartiality' after she declared that Dominic Cummings, Chief Advisor to Johnson had 'broken the rules' when he travelled from London to Durham during lockdown.
Which organisation regulates the broadcast media?	Ofcom regulates to ensure impartiality. The print media aren't regulated as heavily
What percentage of The Sun readers voted Labour in 2017?	30% of the Sun readers voted Labour in 2017 (yougov) - despite the papers portrayal of Corbyn as useless, a 'terrorists friend' and a 'Marxist extremist'. Suggests perhaps a weakening of media influence
What was Paul Whitefield's argument on the influence of the Sun between 1992 and 1997?	Paul Whitefield found that the papers shift to supporting Labour did not persuade large numbers to support Labour, but for many to not vote at all. In 1992, around 1/5 of The Sun readers did not vote This increased to 1/3 by 1997. Suggests that print media can mobilise political particiation
Why might it be argued that the Sun simply identifies, rather than shapes public opinion?	Uses polling to detect the mood of the electorate and their readership. E.g. Thatcherism, Blair, Opinion polls showed that Gordon Brown was a in a weak position in 2010.
Essay plan - Does the media have real influence over public opinion and voting behaviour?	For AgainstSocial media has brought different issues to the attention of the electorate, which influences voting patterns. Momentum - created a youthquake that denied Theresa May a majority. Cambridge Analytica - harvested facebook data and used it to influence Brexit outcomes. Social media inflames culture wars Merely a 'filter bubble' or 'echo chamber', which reinforces rather than determines opinions. Social media apps have algorithims which appeal to individual political inclinations. Print media'It was the sun wot won it'. Serious distrust of print media - Hilsborough disaster. Sensationalist, follows the views of the readers rather than  Broadcast media Reputation for impartiality. Main data2data1data2data1data2
What percent of adults watch BBC one every week for news?	55% of adults watch BBC one every week for news (Ofcom, 2019)Down from 65% in 2010
What percent of adults use TV for news?	74%
How much has trust in the BBC fallen since 2003?	80% of adults used to trust the BBC and ITV. Now only 50% of adults trust the BBC 40% of adults trust ITV
What percentage of adults trust the tabloids?	Less than 10% according to YouGov.
How many women, ethnic minorities and LGBTQ people were elected to Parliament in 2019?	220 women 65 ethnic minorities 45 LGBTQ+ Most diverse Parliament ever
Why was Thatcher able to win an 144 landslide majority majority in 1983?	"Wider Context Thatcher implimented monterarist reforms. She tried to reduce the money supply to target inflation through higher interest rates, higher taxes and spending cuts. They led to unemployment rising to three million. 365 economists wrote a letter to the times arguing the policies were too harsh and harming economic output, but she famously said 'the lady's not for turning' But                 Labour's failuresThatcher's Succeses                 Foot moved the party to the left. ""The longest suicide note in history"". Abolish house of lords, Leave the EEC, Abolish the Lords, Abolish Trident.  Too far from the centre ground. A divided left led to the right of the labour party joining the liberal party. they achieved 25% of the vote, which divided the vote.23 seats. Foot was not seen as a credible PM. Hostile media.   Moderate Thatcher maniesto. - The challenge of our times More Right to buy. Market based supply side politicies like deregulation and privatisation. Warning of the dangers of electing Labour. 1982 - Argentina invades the Falkands Islands. Britain wins the war."
According to the Sunday Times, how many MPs were under investigation for sexual misconduct in 2022?	56
Which Newspaper broke the Scott Benton Lobbying Scandal?	The Sunday Times Scott Benton, the MP for Blackpool South, was caught by undercover reporters for the Times posing on behalf of a fake investment fund saying he could “call in favours” from colleagues and get “easy access” to ministers when queueing for parliamentary votes.
Theresa May eating chips and running through fields of wheat	
Which minority group is most likely to vote Tory?	British Hindu Indians
Which newspaper’s investigation led to the resignation of CBI chief Tony Danker?	Investigations from The Guardian found that Tony Danker’s conduct fell below the standard. He was viewing staff instagram account, organising private karaoke parties and having one on one meetings with hun or staff. This led to his resignation. Subsequent revelations found that the confederation had a culture of sexual assault
Why might the 2019 Election Debate have not mattered for the outcome?	Because a Yougov poll found that amongst viewers, there was no clear winner. 51% of people thought Johnson performed better, and 49% thought Corbyn did. But Johnson ended up winning over 11% more of the cote.
Essay plan - Evaluate the view that it is the media, not pressure groups that has the greater influence on governments. (30)  You must consider this view and the alternative to this view in a balanced way.  June 2022	Thesis: The media sets the agenda and determines public opinion, meanwhile the government can ignore pressures groups that are not popular/ that it does not agree with. Therefore the media is more influential on government.                   Pressure groups are more influentialThe media is more influential                  Pressure groups with insider status can directly Lobby the government and further their own interests. Often have significant financial strength that media might not have. For example - British Bankers Association. Confederation of British Industries - Government tries to court their vote - they want business leaders to support their policy. - Keir Starmer and 'Prawn Cocktail Offensive' at DavosPressure that allign with the government interests can also  shape policy - national farmers union, IEA or Vote Leave.  Business can be sidelined when it is not popular with the public or media moguls such as Rupert Murdoch. Boris Johnson 'fuck business' - despite the CBI warning that Brexit would be a disaster, the Tory party percieved that the Brexit camp had more support amongst the media, and therefore by sticking with the 'get Brexit done' motto, they would do better. Pressure groups can easily be sidelined - but the media prevails. Pressure groups can scrutinise the government and force them to u-turn on their decisions - A wide alliance of pressure groups prevented the government from privatising the forest. Pressure groups often can take the government to court and stop them The media reaches a far larger group of people than pressure groups and action campaigns. E.g. The government ignored the Stop the War Coalition Marches, and still went ahead with the war in Iraq because the tabloid press has huge readerships. E.g. The Sun has a monthly readership of around 30million. So clearly the media is more important.  data1  Media ultimately shapes agenda - Rebekah Brookes. Special relationshp.
According to the Ft, degree holders were [...]% less likely to support the Conservatives, compared to the national average in the 2019 general election	According to the Ft, degree holders were 17% less likely to support the Conservatives, compared to the national average in the 2019 general election
According to the FT, non degree nolders are [...]% more likely to support the Conservatives	According to the FT, non degree nolders are 8% more likely to support the Conservatives
In 2019, YouGov estimated the chance of someone voting Conservative increased by [...] points with every 10 years of someone’s life.	In 2019, YouGov estimated the chance of someone voting Conservative increased by nine points with every 10 years of someone’s life.
What does Ben Ansell from Oxford university argue is the new determinant of voting patterns?	Education. Ansell disagrees with the suggestion that age is the main factor. “The Conservatives didn’t have a young people problem, they had a degree-holder problem — there are just way more degree holders among the young,” Ansell says.
Essay plan - is the UK media good for democracy?	GoodBad                 A Free press - Privately owned, regulated only by business regulations and criminal law. Professional journalism with a high standard of reporting.  Newspapers are strongly partisan and biased. A voluntary self regulation scheme has provided only a weak code of conduct which is often violated - e.g. Millie DowlerOwnership by media moguls distorts political power, favours elitismImpartiality guidelines  A public sector broadcaster operated by a quango. and regulated by ofcom for impartiablity.  Private sector broadcasters that are also ofcom regulated, not controlled by politicians Integrity is undermined - the government appoints the chair of the BBC. Richard Sharp. Often are in breach of impartiality guidelines and espouse narratives that benefit conservatives - e.g. 'household metaphors' when discussing government debt Still the most trusted and most used news sourcesSocial media - acts as an agent of political participation  Momentum - Turnout amongst 18-24year olds increased by 16% in 2017. 60% voted for Corbyn.  Extreme lack of regulation and beyond normal legal provisions. Prone to disinformation campaigns. E.g. Brexitdata1data2data1data2
Evaluate the view that social media is bad for democracy.	Social media is good for democracy Bad for democracy                  Voters can follow their elected representatives on social media, and candidates who are competing against them. By replying and commenting, people have low-cost opportunities to contact and influence them at a national or local level. They can engage with a variety of views and opinionsFilter bubbles and echo chambers reinforce opinions rather than providing a diverse range of perspectives.  I.e. if you lean towards the right, you will seek confirmation bias. Only follow people who offer right wing content. Rapid spread of information that can mobilise participation. For example, the Black Lives Matter. Surfers Against Sewage, FareShare.  EU introduced the Digital Services Act requires that major social media platforms to flag hate speech, eliminate any kind of terrorist propaganda, and put in place frameworks to quickly take down illicit content.Lack of regulation allows the spread of fake news throughout social media.  Fake news was spread through the Brexit referendum - joining the EU would allow government to spend more on NHS. This can lead to the distortion of electoral outcomesHate speach, inflamatory rhetoric. Can be used by government as a form of surveilance. - Loss of privacy  Or social media can be exploited to get people to vote a certain way. Targeted Facebook ads, Cambridge Analytica. Or Russian interferenceduring the 2016 presidential campaign.
Evaluate the view that a person’s age and the media have now replaced social class and region as clear indicators of voting behaviour. (Paper 1, 2020)	Guidance from examiners report  High performing candidates spoke about social media - momentum camaign. High performing candidates drew out the fact that age is an important factor, but only at the very extremes. People in the middle are equally as likely to vote labour or conservative Young people use more social media vs older people consume more of the print media. Print media has a right wing bias. Social class and region are still the main factorsAge and media are now the main factors. Working classes are still more likely to vote for the Labour According to Yougov in 2017 Labour did better than Conservatives amongst DE voters. North south divide - South has more economic might.  Conservative party did better than the labour party across all social groups in 2019. Working class constituencies still vote LabourIn 2017, Labour held 72/100 seats with the most working class voters Some of the seats with the largest Labour majorities are the most working class - e.g. Tottenham, NE London. David Lammy had the largest majority. Hackney South and Shorditch More affluent seats would never vote for the Labour party However, this fell to 53/100 in 2019. Kensington became a Labour seat in 2017The constituency of Workington voted in a Tory MP for the first time since 1979 In the 2022 London local council elections, the Conservatives lost Wandsworth and Westminister to the Labour party. Recent local council elections where Conservatives lost mnay of their 'southern heartlands' The Labour wins came in battleground areas the party had been targeting including Medway in Kent and Swindon in the South West - both of which have been run by the Tories for the past 20 years. A more important issue might be valence issueAge and media are not the most important factors because 30% of the sun readers in 2017 voted for labour, despite headlines such as 'Don't check Britain in the Corbin' High proportion of Telegraph and Guardian readers voting the way that their chosen media outlet told them suggests that this is the main determinant of voting behaviour. People usually look for a 'confirmation bias'. Might be more of an ideologicall thing. Social media.
Which celebrity endorsed Corbyn?	Stormzy. He also said 'fuck the government and fuck Boris'. This explains why Corbyn might have been so much more popular with young people in 2019 - won 56% of younger voters
Votes by Newspaper readership in 2017	
Using Source 2, evaluate the view that state funding of political parties would be preferable to a situation in which a party can win a general election because it has more members and income than other parties. (2020)	Advice from the examinationboard.                   State funding is preferablePreferable that a party can win a general election because it has more members and income.                  Reduce dependence on vested interests In May 2020, The Times revealed that the top 50 political donors had donated £35.5 million between them. The Tories recieved £24.9m of that money.Lords Sainbury recently donated 2millionThe current system has failed to provide adequate regulationsReliance on state funding might reduce parties links to wider society. Parties need to reach out to recruit members and seek donations, be responsive and cater to a rangeInstead it is more important if  parties 'reach out' through increasing their membership fee. E.g. Membership surged under Corbyn  State funding would allow politicians to focus on representing their constituents rather than courting potential donors.Lubov Chernukhin played tennis with Boris Johnson   MORE DEMOCRATIC BECAUSE 1 PERSON = ONE VOTE. CAPITALISM DOES NOT WORK THAT WAY Parties such as the Liberal Democrats could compete on an equal financial footing because funding would be based entirely on membership or electoral performance. In the age of austerity, it would be unpalatable to the electorate if constitutents are paying money to go to parties which they did not pay for
Why did Thatcher win the 1979 General Election?	Labour's failuresThatcher's success                 Bailout from the IMF in 1976 because of poor state of the economy and bad public finances. Labour party was very divided Winter of Discontent -Mass trade union strike action.   Vote of no confidence against James Callaghan's minority government leads to an election being held.  - Callaghan is seen to be out of touch with the winter of discontent.   Conservatives promised tax cuts, the 'right to buy' your counil house. Saatchi and Saatchi -    Presidential campaign based on Thatcher. She was less popular than Callaghan but still won.  Margaret Thatcher went on to win 43.9% of the vote and a 44 majority   59% of middle class (ABC1) voted conservative  49% of working class (DE) voted labour Thatcher managed to court many (C2) workers (skilled working class.
Why has the 'blue wall' been disrupted?	Mass exodus of Londoners moving to traditional blue wall Tory seats. By pandering to the 'red wall' with neoconservative rhetoric, they have demonised much of their managerial base. This might explain why Conservatives lost 1000 seats in the local elections.
Some of Tony Blair and Alastair Campbell's best spins include	'The People's Princess' - used to capture the public mood 'The Sun Back's Blair''Call me Tony'Played football with Footabller Kevin Keegan.
Why did Thatcher win the 1987 General Election?	Wider context Kinnock replaces Foot and gradually moves party to the centre ground  The Miners Strike in 1984-85. The Printworkers' Strike 85086. The Westland Affair - 1986. But inflation was below 4%. Unemployment fell and the economy was growing.                  Labour FailuresThatcher Successes.                  Labour campaign was presidential. As someone who was ordinary, wanted to challenge the militants in the party. Kinnock's personal ratings improved & focused on high unemployment and NHS waiting list. Kinnock was seen as competent and a good campaigner.But still did not manage to win. The labour party was still divided. Emphasis on low taxes, economy, national defence and strong economic record.  Despite Kinnock's improvement, Thatcher was favouted as the best PM.  The electoral system - the majority of the country wanted a left wing party but conservatives were rewarded.
2005 general election notes	Blair won a 66 seat majority on a meagre 35.2% of the vote. After Blair wins in 2001, 911 happens. War on Terror Dodgy Dossier - Claimed that Saddam Hussein had the power to launch WMD against allies within 45minutes. Dr David Kelly told Andrew Gilligan that this claim was false. There was a public inquiry. David Kelly was brought before a select committee, 2 days later he was found dead. 1.5-2million people marched against the war. Many were angry, they thought that the government 'sexed up' a dossier. Blair says that he will step down. The campaign focus on their successes. Labour retains the support of the Murdoch empireConservative party is still the 'nasty party' - they haven't modernised and reached out to the centre ground.
Evaluate the view that election outcomes are influenced more by the media than by any other factors	The Media is more influential Other factors are more influential                  The media was fundamental in delivering Tony Blair his landslide majority in 1979.  He flew to Australia in 1997 to court the Murdoch papers Many on the left talk about how It doesn't always work. Despite backing from Right wing tabloids, neither Theresa May or David Cameron won a majority. The sun headline 'don't chuck Britain in the Corbin' did not deny Theresa May a majority. Social media has brought different issues to the attention of the electorate, which influences voting patterns. Momentum - created a youthquake that denied Theresa May a majority. Cambridge Analytica - harvested facebook data and used it to influence Brexit outcomes. Social media inflames culture wars Echo chambers. data1data2
Why did Gordon Brown lose the election in 2010?	Brown's failuresClegg and Cameron's Successes                 Called a former labour voter in Rochdale a 'bigoted woman'. This made Gordon Brown seem out of touch from the concerns about immigration.  Bottler BrownNick Clegg had made a big impact in 2010 with the TV debates. Led to a Cleggmania Brown stole policies about inheritance tax and non dom status from the Tories.
The media reaction to Liz Truss' mini budget	
