#separator:tab
#html:false
What is representative democracy?	A form of democracy in which voters elect representatives to make political desicions on their behalf. These representatives are then held accountable by the public as well in elections.
Pros of representative democracy	Carried out by professional politicians who make politically eduated desicions.Politicians balance interests when making desicions, protecting rights of all citizens.
Cons of Representative democracy.	MPs often disengaged from the public and so do not represent their specific interests.Unrepresentative due to FPTP system in UK having wasted votes and minority parties having insignificant says in debate.
What is Direct democracy?	A form of democracy in which citizens themselves make desicions. For example, referendums.
Types of Direct Democracy in the UK	Recall of MPs act 2015.Referendums.Electronic petitions.Political party leadership elections.
Arguments Against Further devolution:	Devolved assembly turnout has dropped since founding. NI assembly turnout 1998 was 69.8% but in 2016 it was 54.9%.Elected commisioners since 2016 are voted for with an average of 25% - No enthusiamsm.
Arguments against HOL reform	Elected Lords can rival commons, causing gridlock.Cronyism amongst appointed Lords. David Cameron appointed 13 peers from his political allies.
Arguments against digital democracy:	Voting can no longer be secret and so voting manipulation may increase.Allegations of cyber interference from russia increasing. Open to more fraud.
Turnout of 2011 AV referendum and results.	42% turnout.67.9% said No to changing FPTP.
Arguments against reform of the Westminster electoral system:	PR would make coalition governments.In 2017, highest percentage of electorate voted Tory and Labour than any general election since 1970, proving FPTP is still appropriate. No multi party democracy just yet.
What is a Plurist democracy?	In a pluralist democracy is where political influence is distributed amongst a diverse range of groups in society. Ensuring there is fair competition betwen rival groups for influence.
What are sectional inerest groups?	Pressure groups that represent the interests of a specific groups in society. For example, the National union of students.
What are Cause / Promotional pressure groups?	Pressure groups who base campaigning around a cause to promote that particular issue to the public. Examples include Greenpeace.
What are Insider pressure groups?	Pressure groups with links to MPs and the government and desicion - making. For example, the british medical association consults the government with specialist information which governments will wish to consult and gain opinions from.
What are Outsider groups?	"Outsider pressure groups are groups with no links to government or MPs. Beause of this they try to gain support through gsining public popularity. Examples include the #blacklivesmatter movement."
Why are some pressure groups more successful than others?	R - Resources available. I - Ideaology compatiblity with the government. P - Popularity. E - Expertise.
What are think tanks?	Professonal institutes that the government consult when making desicions. These include the right - wing Adam Smith institute that works with  the conservative party to help develop policy.
What is Somerset v Stuart (1772)?	Lord Mansfield stated slavery in the UK was illegal as it had not been passed as an act of parliament and was unsupported by common law. Lord Mansfield's judgement set the precedent for the end of slavery in Britain.
The Human rights Act of 1998.	Incorporates the European Convention of Human Rights fully into British Law. Gave British citizens a clear statement of what their civil liberties were. Was significant as it clearly establishes positives rights such as the right to life and the right to a fair hearing.
The Freedom of Information 2000.	Established a right to access to information as long as it does not compromise national security.
What is an example of a successful pressure group?	The Hillsborough family support group - Successfully caused the release of documents to an independent inquiry to prosecute those policing on the day.
How did the Hillsborough family support group (pressure group) become successful?	It had a 130,000 strong petition asking for documents to be released.Liverpool MP was lobbied.Campaigning by the Daily Mirror.Government support and idealogical compatibility with the government.
Name a successful election camppaign that gained a lot of traction?	The 1964 Harold Wilson '13 wasted years' campaign.The 1997 'New labour' campaign.
What was voter turnout in 1997 compared to 2017?	It was at 71% in 1997 and fell to 68% in 2017. This shows Britain has on average become more accustommed to a crisis of participation in recent years.
Give an example of the recall of MPs act 2015 in action?	In 2019, Peterboruough's Labour MP, Fiona Onasanya was sentenced to 3 months in prison for speeding. Her constituentcy signed 25% to remove her from office, causing a by - election as a result.
What are arguments for votes for 16 year olds?	In the 2014 Scottish referendum, 16-17 year olds were allowed to vote. The introduction of citizenship lessons in schools means young people are more educated to vote.If 16-17 year olds can vote in the Scottish elections they should be able to vote in the Westminster elections.
What was the turnout amongst 16 - 17 year olds in the 2014 Scottish independence referendum?	75% showing partiipation in this age group is present, although this could be down to level of national identity.
What is the turnout in isle of man elections for 16 - 17 year olds?	It has declined from 55% in 2006 to 46% in 2016. 46% shows from a regular perspective, 16-17 year olds participation is poor.
What was the % of voter turnout from the 1975 EEC election compared to the 2016 EEC election?	In 1975, the turnout was 64% but in 2016 it was 72.2%. Shows participation crisis is not necessarily occurring in direct and more representative elections/referendums.
What was the membership of political parties in 2018?	Labour = 552,000. Conservatives = 124,000. SNP = 118,000. Liberal Democrats = 101,000.
What is a 'Lobbyist'?	A Lobbyist is someone who represents the interest f a particular group or cause and seek to influence politicians in it's favour. They do this by cultivating links to politicians.
What is an example of successful lobbying?	The Raptor's Alliance, which represents pigeons, said the RSPCA had become so successful with restoring Brids of Prey that they were harming pigeon populations. By holding a Commons v Lords pigeon race, the group raised support, even Theresa May sponsored a bird.
What is an example of a drawback to Lobbying on the fees of politicians?	Jack Straw, an ex- foreign secretary, was caught in 2015 telling a fake company he charged £5000 - £8000 for lobbying. This shows distrust in MPs, which undermines the legitimacy of representative democracy and the FPTP system.
What is adversery politics?	The oppositie of consensus politics. It is where main parties are divided on fundamental philosophical and policy differences.
