#separator:tab
#html:false
Explain the composition of the class classification system.	A - Upper middle classes - Top civil services, high - up managers etc. B - Middle class people - Lawyers, Accountants etc. C1 - Clerical workers, shop owners, lower middle classes. C2 - Skilled workers, Aspirational working classes. D - Semi skilled working classes. E -Unskilled working classes.
What is Partisan dealignment?	referes to voters, since 1970, voting against the party their class is loyal to and instead voting on governing competence factors, issue and valnce based voting.
What is Class Dealignment?	Where voters are less likely to vote in accordance to that of their class. Closely linked to Partisan Dealignment.
Example of class dealignment.	After the 1979 ''Winter of Discontent'', Margaret Thatcher and the Conservatives gained an 11% swing from C2 voters due to valence and governing competence factors regarding James Callaghan's government.
Example of Partisan Dealignment.	In 2019, Boris Johnson won an 80 seat majority due to issues factors regarding Brexit, showing an increase in Partisan dealignment.
Example of region's impact on voting behaviour.	Scotland had 56 out of 59 seats go to the SNP in the 2015 election. Shows local policy causes parties to have more influence in their targeted regions.South East is more prosperous with more home ownership and little tradition of industry and heavy trade unionism, leading to more conservative policies and support than the Nort of England, which has a contrasting support for Labour as a result.
Example of Age and it's impact on voting bhaviour.	Jeremy Corbyn's pledge to abolish Tuition fees in the 2017 manifesto he had led to him gaining 62% of the 18 - 24 year old's votes in comparison to the Conservatives 27% of overall 18 - 24 year olds.
Example of Ethnicity on voting behaviour.	In 2017, Jeremy Corbyn's stance on strong empathy for immigrant communities led him to gain 49 of the 73 Greater London seats because only 45% of the Greater London citizens are White British people. Ethnic people usually come from poorer backgrounds because they immigrated over with less generations ago and settled in poorer areas as a result.
Example of Gender and Voting behaviour.	Gender usually had women vote for Labour and Male more Right wing.But in 1979, 47% of women voted for Thatcher over 43% of men, likely due to her being the first female prime - minister.
Examples of governing competence on voting behaviour.	Successful Governing Competence - In 1983, although unemployment was still high, the Public were satisfied with MArgaret Thatcher because she fullfilled her promise to bring inflation back under control.Unsuccessful Governing Competence - James Callaghans inability to control strikes during the Winter of Discontent caused the public to have an undermined faith in his government. This led to voters voting for Margaret Thatcher as they viewed her as being more capable of confronting the growing power of trade unionism.
Example of Charisma and it's effect on voting behaviour.	In 1997, Tony Blair's down - to - earth and relatable personality made him popular amongst the public. Led to a huge 2001 win over William Hague and his divided Conservative Party.
Example of Charisma in the leader of the opposition.	David Cameron's focus on huge national debt brought in by Gordon Brown led to a Labour defeat in 2010.
Examples of effective campaigns and voting behaviour.	In 2017, Jeremy Corbyn helped further appealed Labour policy to younger people by speaking to them directly at Glastonbury festival, a heavily young - person orientated festival. This effective campaign led to 62% of 18 - 24 year olds voting for Labour in 2017 in comparison to 27% to the Conservatives.
Give an example arguing campaigns influence the result of a general election?	In 2017, Jeremy Corbyn's optimistic rallies and popular manifesto commitments such as ending tuition fees contrasted sharply to Theresa May's boring campaign.  Labour drastically improved it's position to achieve over 40% of the vote in the GE.
What is an argument that campaigns do not inlfuence the result of a general election?	In the 1950s and 1960s, class alignment was so strong that campaigns were ineffective. As shown by the 1955 and 1959 elections being confirmed under the conservatives, despite Edens failure in the Suez crisis.Despite of poor Conservative campaigning in 2017, the Tories were able to increase their vote share from 36% in 2015 to 42% in 2017. Issue voting more impactful than campaigning here?
What is an argument that voting trends are a problem for UK democracy?	In 2001, turnout was just 59% due to Blairite consensus politics, this was 71% in 1997 and 77% in 1992.Dissilusion amongst poor and young increasing - In 2015, the ten lowest turnout seats were in the lowest income brackets - Allows for unrepresentivity and Conservative dominance in Parliament.
What is an argument that voting trends are not a problem for UK democracy?	In 2005, voter turnout increased to 61% from 59% in 2001, showing that issues affecting voter trends can be short term.Surge of interest for Jeremy Corbyn's 2017 campaign brought voting turnout of 18-24 year olds to 60%.Jeremy Corbyn's ''for the many not the few' campaign demonstrates that in spite of lower than average turnout, younger people are still recognsied and represented in Parliament to an extent.
