#separator:tab
#html:false
How do liberals view human nature?	Positive view of human nature, based on rationalism. Views all individuals as unique and highly capable, and if given opportunity will advance. Views humans as having foundational equality and rejects superiority based on birthright Their ability to make their own decisions should not be curtailed.
What is egotistical individualism?	Beleif held by classical liberals, that individuals are self seeking and self reliant.
What is developmental individualism?	The view that individual freedom is linked to the desire to create a society in which each person can grow and flourism.
How does individualism link to tolerance?	Individuals should be free to persue their own desires and as long as it does not harm others, it should be accepted.
What is utilitarianism?	According to Jeremy Benthan, each individual can decide what is in their own interests. Human actions are moitvated by a desire to persue pleasure and avoid pain. Governments should not prevent people from doing what they choose unless they threaten the ability of others.
How do classical liberals view the state?	Based on a 'social contract' - state must have the agreement of the people. As a 'necessary evil' to avert disaster and protect the vulnerable. But 'evil' as it has the potential to remove individual liberty and persue it's own intersts. Thus, state should be limited with checks and balances
How do liberals think the state should be limited?	Constituionalism - government in which power is distributed and limited by a system of laws, to prevent a concentration of power. Typical features include Seperation of powersChecks and balancesA bill of rights. Perhaps a codified constituionDevolved government. Laissez faire capitalism - The Road to Serfdom.
What is rationalism?	The belief that human beings are rational beings. They should be free to exercise judgement without outside interference. Reasoned debate and discussion should be used to resolve disputes
What is foundational equality?	All human beings have rights by virtue of being born, which cannot be taken away. Individuals should enjoy the same legal and political rights in society Wollstonecraft - women are no less rational, therefore are entitled to the same rights and civil liberties e.g. a career
How do modern and classical liberals disagree on equality?	Modern liberals believe that state should take an active role to faciliate equality of opportunity and meritocracyBut classical liberals believe that inequality comes from differences in ability and is important to create incentives
Why do liberals support democracy?	Social contract theory. It enables individuals to hold government to account. Shows the will of the people. Protects minority. Gives political voice to different groups.
Why do liberals fear excessive democracy?	Might lead to the tyranny of the majority.
What is the mechanistic theory?	The theory that people created the state to serve them and act in their interests
What are the 6 main ideas of liberalism?	Individualism - egotistical individualism vs developmental individualism Freedom/liberty - ability to make decisions in your own rational interest  State - it is 'necessary' to avoid disorder, but 'evil' because it has the potential to remove liberty .  Rationalism - humans are rational creatures.  Equality/social justice - Individuals are of equal value and should be treated fairly by society - Foundational vs formal vs equality of opportunity Liberal democracy - A democracy that balances the will of the people and civil liberty.
