#separator:tab
#html:false
What was the Beveridge report?	Beveridge's Report to Parliament on Social Insurance and Allied Services was published in 1942 All people should pay weekly contributions in national insurance  in return for benefits, sick pay, pensions.  A starving man is not freeCreate a 'minimum standard of living', 'below which no one should be allowed to fail'. Government should five the five 'Giant evils' of Want, Disease, Ignorance, Squalor and IdlenessPromised to protect people 'from the cradle to the grave'
According to John Locke, The end of the law [...]	According to John Locke, The end of the law is not to abolish and restrain, but to preserve and enlarge freedom
According to Charles de Montesquieu, Power should be [...]	According to Charles de Montesquieu, Power should be a check unto power
"According to John Stuart Mill, ""the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community against his will, is to [...]"	"According to John Stuart Mill, ""the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community against his will, is to prevent harm to others"""
According to John Locke, beings are obliged by “natural law” not to harm “t[...]	According to John Locke, beings are obliged by “natural law” not to harm “tthe life, the liberty, health, limb or goods of another”
According to Adam Smith‘it is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer or the baker that we expect our dinner, but from their [...]’.	According to Adam Smith‘it is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer or the baker that we expect our dinner, but from their regard for their own interest’.
Tensions between liberals on the state	Early liberals distrusted the state especially as it was often the rule of a single person or small cohort.    Classical liberals understood the need for a state but felt it had to be kept to a minimum or the so called ‘night watchman’ view of its role.    Modern liberals see the need for a state as an enabler – to provide opportunity for others to advance and progress
What were John Locke's key ideas	Social contract theory – society, state and government are based on a theoretical voluntary agreement.  Government by consent, which the individual has the right to withdraw. Limited government - Rule of law to guarentee freedom for all Based on reason - no rational person would submit to arbitrary rule because this would not be in their best interest
What were Wollstonecraft's key ideas?	Vindication of the Rights of Women 1972   Reason – women are rational and independent beings capable of reason.     Formal equality – in order to be free, women should enjoy full civil liberties and be allowed to have a career.
What were John Stuart Mill's Key ideas (1806-73)	Harm principle (On liberty,1859) – that individuals should be free to do anything except harm other individuals.  Very stricly limited role for government. However, he later accepted that some degree of state intevention can be justified to prevent the poor from enduring injustice.  He was in favour of inheritance tax because inheritance gave people advantages. - he repressents a bridge between classical and modern liberalism Tolerance – views other than our own should be tolerated. Just because a view is widely held, does not make it correct. It is the 'despotism of custom' Believed in complete equality of the sexes. Championed female suffrage
What were John Rawls' (1921-2002) main ideas	Theory of justice (1871) – opinion that society must be just and guarantee each citizen a life worth living.     The veil of ignorance –  hypothetical scenario where individuals, agree on the type of society they want from a position where they lack knowledge of their own position in society.  Rejected the two extremes of communism and unregulated capitalism, instead favouring a 'property owning democracy' where ownership is widely distirbuted.
According to JS Mill, The only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent [...].’	According to JS Mill, The only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others.’
What were Betty Friedan's main ideas (1921-2006)	The Feminine Mystique (1963)Legal equality – women are as capable as men and that oppressive laws and social views must be overturned.Social conditioning, not biology led women to become housewives.   Equal opportunity – women are being held back from their potential because of the limited number of jobs that are ‘acceptable’ for women.   Advocated greater opportunities and change of attitutes.
How did Emmanual Kant believe that humans should be treated?	Humans should be treated ‘always as an end and never as a means only’. By this, Kant meant that since humans are rational, self-aware beings with free will, they should not be treated as mere things, or used against their will as resources
Did Hayek believe that there should be no state intervention?	"No - state has to take an active role in facilitating competition.  ""Nor is there any reason why the state should not assist the individuals in providing for those common hazards of life against which, because of their uncertainty, few individuals can make adequate provision.""  Hayek did not subscribe, in his own words, to a ""dogmatic laissez faire attitude"" (p85). He believed in rules ""to limit working hours or to require certain sanitary arrangements"", and believed they were ""fully compatible with the preservation of competition"" (p86). He added on the next page:"
What did Hayek believe caused recession?	"The Hayekian explanation for the crisis says it's all down to government meddling, to policymakers not giving markets the benefit of the doubt. And the worst kind of meddling, Hayek thought, came in the government's determination to control the price of money - also known as the interest rate.   In the Austrian view, the US Federal Reserve and other central banks helped cause the financial crisis, by always cutting interest rates when the economy showed signs of faltering; for example, after the bursting of the dotcom bubble.    That might have staved off a more serious downturn. But only at the cost of encouraging people to take on debts they couldn't afford - and giving banks an incentive to take excessive risks.   This, in effect, is the argument that Hayek made against Keynes in the late 1920s and 1930s: he said the Fed caused the crash, by keeping interest rates too low and encouraging a lot of ""malinvestment"" - investment in projects or assets which were not economically worthwhile."
According to John Locke, where there '[...]'	According to John Locke, where there 'no law, there is no freedom'
What three reasons did John Locke give for 'Toleration' in 1667?	In his 'Essay concerning toleration' (1667), he advocated tolerance based on three points Because Earthly judges, the state in particular, and human beings in general, cannot dependably evaluate the truth-claims of competing religious standpointsEven if they could, enforcing a single 'true religion' would never work, because you can't be compelled into belief through violence. Coercing religious uniformity leads to far more social disorder than allowing diversity Therefore state should be a 'nightwatchman' and not a police of morality.
What 2 ideas did Locke set out in his 1689 'Two Treatises of Government'?	In the First Treatise, Locke challenged the idea of a 'Divine Right of Kings'. In the Second Treatise, Locke challenged Hobbes' ideas on the state of nature. He believed that humans were rational and consented to  a social contract with governments, in order to ensure their benefits and maximise their liberty People have the right to depose a government that exceeds its powers
How does Rawls's 'difference principle' justify inequality?	On top of these we would also want some principle of fairness; and so Rawls’s “difference principle” asserts that any inequality in society can be justified only to the extent that it benefits the worst off.   If, for example, the estimated £2.4m paid in bonuses to Thames Water bosses in 2021 could be shown to improve the lot of its poorest customers – perhaps by encouraging them to run it with such skill that they could cut prices and improve standards – then it would be justifiable. But the fact it was handed out despite rising bills and millions of litres of water leaking from its pipes every day suggests it wasn’t.
When was 'A theory of Justice' published?	Published in 1971
What does John Locke believe that individuals can do, if their government is not properly protecting their 'life, liberty and property'?	They can overthrow the government and create a social contract with a new one. This is why in the American Declaration of Independence, the second ammendment allows the right to bear arms
