#separator:tab
#html:false
Liberalism - Fact file    Emerged due to what? Reflection of? Apart of what era where thinkers believed?	- Emerged in reaction to monarchies and aristocratic priviledge in early modern world - Reflected views of the educated middle classes  - Liberalism was part of the Enlightenment -> 18th century intellectual movement stressing the power of reason and freedom of the individual  - Thinkers believed in the abolishment of traditional restrictions placed on the individual by church or gov
Individualism - Introduction   Libers stress x>y Immanuel Kant argued all individuals are what? -> people are...     ...'categorical imperative'	- Liberals stress importance of individual over claims of any social group/collective - Immanuel Kant (enlightenment thinker): argued all individuals are unique and have equal worth -> people are not instruments for achievement of a common goal but should be free to perform an action for their own sake ('categorical imperative')
Individualism (human nature) - Classical liberal view   ____ individualism -> minimises what? Collection of ?	- egoistical individualism -> view that all people are essentially self-seeking & self-reliant -> minimises importance of society, just a collection of independent individuals
Individualism - 2 interpretations - Alternative view   ___ individualism -> what is individual freedom linked to ???	2. Developmental individualism -> concept more widely accepted -> view that individual freedom is linked to the desire to create a society in which each person can flourish
Individualism and tolerance   Define tolerance  What kind of right is it? Example of liberal tolerences	- Idea linked to the individual in that it is a natural right that everyone deserves, people should not try and restrict others  - Eg liberals supporing abortion rights and same-sex marriage as these are choices the individual should make
Freedom / liberty - intro    importance of freedom Early liberals objected to what? How must freedom be exercised under what? Locke quote	- Freedom is most important liberal value - Early liberals objected to manner authoritarian govs claimed a right to make decisions on the behalf of people and attempted to regulate behaviour  - Freedom must be exercised under some law in order to protect people's rights from one another - Locke 'where there is no law, there is no freedom'
Jeremy Bentham - liberty   Connected to which school of thought? What did Bentham argue gov should... Mechanistic view....   ...driven	- Concept of liberty central to school of thought utilitarianism -> leading thinker Jeremy Bentham maintained that each individual can decide what is in his or her interests - He argued gov should not prevent people from doing what they want unless they threaten others' rights to liberty (-ve) - A mechanistic view of human behaviour that saw people as driven by rational self-interest
Liberty - J.S Mill   What did he contribute?	- Perhaps the most important classical liberal thinker of 19th century - Put forward idea that became negative freedom -> individuals should only be subject to external restraint when their actions potentially affect others
Liberty -  Positive freedom	- Thought that people are both individual and social by nature - Individuals should be free to control their own destiny and develop their talents to achieve self-fufilment -> some limited state intervention could act as guidence to reach that level
The state - Core   Why do liberals accept the state? Why is power mistrusted Quote - Lord Acton Therefore..	- Liberals tend to accept the state as necessary to avert disorder and protect vunerable from exploitation - However they mistrust power, seeing it as inevitably corrupting due to self-seeking nature of humans - 'power tends to corrupt, and absolute power corrupts absolutely' - Lord Acton - Therefore liberals oppose the concentration of political power and advocate for limited gov
The state - How should government be organised?   What do liberals argue for? Why is this an effective method?	- Liberals argue for limited gov, checks and balances & constitutionalism - With sop and checks and balances government is split into the executive, the judiciary and the legislature -> each given exclusive powers which are interwoven meaning they all have counterbalances to each other -> no single person/branch can dominate  - Eg USA
The state - A bill of rights	- Liberals also favour a bill of rights which explicitly define the rights of citizens and defines the relationship between the gov and the governed
The state - Devolution	- Liberal suspicion of concentrated political power leads to their endorsement of devolution where power is transferred to regional bodies - Occured in the UK with the Welsh assembly and Scottish Parliament - Reduces chance of the state infringing on civil liberties if their power is more spread
The state - Laissez-faire   Minimal state Liberals of ____ century Influenced by whom	- Emphasis on minimal state also has a role in economic dimension - Liberals in the 18/19th century believed in laissez-faire capitalism -> earliest comprehensive description of this system was by Adam Smith in his work The Wealth of Nations -> described an 'invisible hand' of supply and demand which should be left be in order to gain economic prosperity
The state - Key ideas	- Corrupting nature of power -> Limited gov through sop and c & b - Bill of rights - Devolution - Laissez-faire
Rationalism   What is in the heart of what? Individuals should be free to .... People will inevitably do ... > x Linked to what idea	- Heart of the Enlightenment thinking was the human capacity for reason  - Individuals should be free to exercise their own interests without external guidence eg state or church - Belief that people will inevitably make mistakes but it is better to accept that responsibility than take instruction from above - Faith in reason is linked to idea of a progressive society in which personal development promotes wider social advancement
Rationalism in action   What do liberals accept and what is their preferred method? What did late 19th century liberals do? Policy in international relations and give 3 examples	- Liberals accept competition between individuals, groups and nations will regrettably produce conflicts -> favour use of reasoned debate to solve disputes - Liberals in late 19th century were at the forefront of developing industrial arbitration -> neutral 3rd party would resolve the issue (both sides win = rational) - In international relationsm liberals view war as a last resort, liberals were at forefront of the creation of the League of Nations and later the UN
Equality and social justice    What is equality of opportunity and foundational equality?	- Liberals place emphasis on equality of opportunity meaning all individuals should have an equal chance in life whether rise or fall - Foundational equality -> a belief in formal equality, rights that all humans should enjoy by virtue of being born, equal social and political rights in society
Equality and social justice   Liberals reject what and thus say what should be rewarded? The resulting acts as what? A good _____ Eg liberal PM ____	- Liberals reject equality of outcome, classical liberals believe individuals with different talents should be rewarded accordingly -> the resulting inequality of wealth acts as incentive to work harder  - A good meritocracy (society where success based on hard work / ability) - Eg UK Liberal PM William Gladstone who introduced competative examinations for entry to the civil service, bringing an end to aristocrat nepotism
Equality   What do modern liberals believe?	- Most modern liberals favour some degree of intervention to narrow inequalities -> believe true equality is not possible without some social justice
Liberal democracy - Introduction   What does a liberal democracy involve? What idea is essential to liberals and gov? Gov should be based on what?	- Since the 19th century most liberals have supported the concept of liberal democracy, involving: -> free elections -> limitations on power of state -> respect for civil liberties and toleration to different views - Idea government should be based on consent is central to liberal thinking, without the government lacks the foundation of legitimacy
Liberal democracy - Social contract   Who and where did the idea come from? Describe the idea	- Idea of a social contract between the people and the state was explained by John Locke in his book Two Treatises of Government  - He argued that people must freely give up their consent to be governed & have the right to a rebellion if the contract is broken
Liberal democracy   Liberals support democracy on the grounds... 3 things   Problems with democracy  2 things then 2 examples follow	- Support democracy because it enables citizens to hold gov to account - Also extends popular participation and performs an educational function in society -> promoting personal development - Gives a political voice to different groups and interests   - On the other hand, liberals have feared excessive democracy due to 'tyranny of the majority' -> surpressing minority interests - May also lead to the dull conformism of the masses -> J.S Mill once proposed giving educated more voting power in order to counterbalance (would be rejected by modern libs) -> US ECV is designed to give a buffer between masses and the political sphere as EC members can vote against masses etc
Liberals - Human nature overview   See people as what?? Stress what People should be free to ___ enjoying ___ Tolerant Classical / modern view of freedom	- See people as rational individuals capable of percieving their own self interests  - Stress +ve potential of human nature - People should be free to make most of their talents, enjoying equality of opportunity  - People should be tolerant of different views  - Classical liberals believe people should only be restricted when they threaten liberty of others (-ve freedom)  - Modern liberals are more catious of social injustice and therefore favour state to play a small role in reducing this
Liberals - The state overview    What contract is central to liberal thought Believe in what type of gov (explain) to prevent? Keen to disperse ___	- Central to liberal thought is concept of social contract -> idea that state is based on the agreement of ppl who give up some freedom in exchange for security - Believe in limited gov -> c&b, sop, B.o.r to prevent abuse of power - Also keen to disperse authority through devolution to ensure it is not highly concentrated
Liberals - Society overview   Classical view -> advocated what Both believe in what equality? Modern liberals believe in what is not enough to achieve ___	- Classical liberals downplayed importance -> primarily a collection of individuals pursuing self-interests -> they advocated meritocracy where individuals succeed via hard work/ ability  - Belief in foundational equality -> people are born equal and should be treated so (political and legal rights) - Modern liberals believe that this is not enough to achieve full equality and therefore advocate some state intervention (linked to +ve freedom) -> they believe society is more than a collection of individuals
Liberals - Economy overview   Classical liberal view Modern liberal view	- Classical liberalism places an emphasis on the free market -> idea that the economy is best at regulating itself - Modern liberals believe that the economy is best with some degree of state interferience in order to maintain sustainable growth and reduce poverty / injustices
