#separator:tab
#html:false
John Locke (1623-1704) - 2 Key ideas   Society __ Gov What type of thinker was he?   Name of work?	1. Society, state and government are based on a voluntary agreement or contract 2. Government should be limited, based on consent from below - Classical liberal thinker   - Wrote Two Treatises of Government
John Locke - Ideas 1   What type of gov did locke advocate and what was his reasoning? What is locke's natural philosophy founded on Legitimacy and governance	- Locke advocated limited government stating that those with power must be restrained by law  - Locke's philosophy is founded on the docrtine of natural rights and natural laws -> people born equal and must respect each others rights - Gov derives its legitimacy from the people and should govern in accordance with natural rights
Locke - Social contract theory   What is it? Further explain what are the conditions to the contract and consequences?   What was the idea based on and why does that link him to classical liberalism	- Social contract -> idea that state society and government are based on a theoretical voluntary agreement - People should accept authority of gov so long as it upholds its part of the contract -> if gov breaks the contract through infringing on the natural rights of people, being intolerant or not respecting property rights -> the people are entitled to resist    - Idea based on reason in that no rational person would submit to brutal authoritarian rule as it is not in their best interests -> classical liberal view that the gov should serve the individual
Mary Wollstonecraft (1759-97) - Key ideas	- Women are rational, independent beings  - In order to be free, women should enjoy full civil liberties and the ability to pusue a career
John Stuart Mill (1806-73)    Key ideas (2)	1. Individuals should be free to to anything except harm other individuals (later became known as -ve freedom) 2. It is important to tolerate ideas other than one's own
John Stuart Mill - Core principles    What was his most important contribution? He was in favour of what in order to promote fairness? What were his views on tolerance and give an example	- Most important contribution was the harm principle (-ve freedom) which expanded into his advocation for a strictly limited role of government - In favour of an inheritance tax which would limit the natural advantages given to those in the upper classes  - Mill upheld the idea of tolerance and the right for everyone to have the opportunity to express their view -> notably he campaigned for equal voting rights for men and women which was especially radical at the time
John Rawls    Key ideas on society (2)	1. Society must be just and guarantee each citizen a life worth living 2. A fair society is one in which the difference in outcomes for the richest and poorest is kept to a minimum
John Rawls - Core   What was his book called and what did he attempt to reconcile? He accepted that there would always be __ Describe his hypothesis eg veil of ignorance Rejected which 2 extremes	- Best known for A Theory of Justice in which he attempted to reconcile individual freedom and avoidence of excessive inequality in society  - He accepted there would always be a degree of inequality, but said that society should aim to minimise the difference in the outcomes for best off and poorest   - Hypothesised a situation where a 'veil of ignorance' would be placed over a group of 'unequal' people in different classes so they were unaware of their wealth and background -> he believed that upon deciding how society should be like individuals would want to mitigate risk and agree that natural rights should be established with the highest standard of living possible in case they were those disadvantaged   - Rejected two extremes of communism and unregulated capitalism instead favouring a middle ground where the state distributes wealth to those who are suffering in poverty
Betty Friedan    - Key ideas (2)	1. Women are as capable as men and oppressive laws and social views must be rejected 2. Women are held back for fufilling their potential by unfair ideas about the kind of employment they can take up
Betty Friedan - Femininsm   Who was she and what did she believe in? How was this path for women set and then reinforced What did she campaign for? How was her philosophy grounded in liberal views?	- American liberal feminist who believed that conditioning rather than biology led women to become wives and homemakers, rather than pursuing a career - Path was set early by school / family and then reinforced by social, cultural and religious pressures - Friedan campaigned for wider opportunities for women and greater workplace equality - Philosophy grounded in liberal belief of equality of individuals, rights and opportunity
Locke - Freedom quote	'where there is no law, there is no freedom'
Liberal key thinkers (7)	1. John Locke - Classical liberal  - Social contract theory -> state was created to serve the individual not the other way around, hypothetical agreement - Idea based on the liberal assumption of human rationality - 'Where there is no law, there is no freedom' - Advocate of a limited government which must be restrained by law - Gov derives its legitimacy from the people and should govern in accordance with natural rights  - Two Treatises of Government   2. John Stuart Mill - Classical liberal - Harm principle -> individuals should be free to do anything except harm other individuals  - Highlighted the importance of tolerance, evidenced in his advocation for the enfranchisement of women as an MP (radical view at the time) - In favour of an inheritance tax which would limit the natural advantages handed to the aristocracy   3. John Rawls - Modern liberal - Society must guarantee a life worth living for all - Attempted to reconcile individual freedom and the avoidence of excessive inequality within society - Veil of ignorance hypothesis - Rejected both communism and unregulated capitalism as too extreme and instead argued for a middle ground where the state distributes wealth to those who are suffering in poverty - A Theory of Justice   4. Betty Friedan - Men and women are just as capable of one-another yet oppressive laws and social views restrict them - Women are stigmatised into not partaking in a career - The state must do more to ensure equal workplace rights, her philosophy was grounded in the liberal belief of equality of individuals, rights and opportunity   5. William Gladstone - Liberal PM - Introduced competitive examinations for the civil service to discourage nepotism  - Therefore advocating for a meritocratic society and greater equality of opportunity   6. Sir William Beveridge - Wrote The Beveridge Report - Claimed the state should help its citizens 'from cradle to grave' - Helped create the Labour Party and the NHS   7. Jeremy Bentham - Concept of liberty central to school of thought utilitarianism, he argued that individuals were capable of deciding what was in their best interests and were motived by achieving their own goals  - Benthen argued that individuals should be free to pursue their own interests given they are not infringing upon the freedom of others
