https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover
UK Government
1 The Constitution
● 1.2 How the constitution has changed since 1997.
○ Under Labour 1997–2010: House of Lords reforms, electoral reform; devolution;
Human Rights Act 1998; and the Supreme Court.
○ Under the Coalition 2010–15: Fixed Term Parliaments, Act 2011; further
devolution to Wales.
○ Any major reforms undertaken by governments since 2015, including further
devolution to Scotland (in the context of the Scottish Referendum).
● 1.3 The role and powers of devolved bodies in the UK, and the impact of this
devolution on the UK.
○ Devolution in England.
○ Scottish Parliament and Government.
○ Welsh Assembly and Government.
○ Northern Ireland Assembly and Executive
● 1.4 Debates on further reform.
○ An overview of the extent to which the individual reforms since 1997 listed in section
1.2 above should be taken further.
○ The extent to which devolution should be extended in England.
○ Whether the UK constitution should be changed to be entrenched and codified,
including a bill of rights.
Potential Devolution Essay Questions/Key Debates
🗣 Key Debates 🗣
● The key debates are in relation to devolution’s impact, whether it should be considered a
success and whether it should be extended, especially in England.
● If you make detailed essay plans on the questions in bold below, you should be well
prepared for the exam.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 1
❓ Past/Possible Essay Questions❓
● Evaluate the view that devolution reforms haven’t gone far enough (30)
● Evaluate the view that devolution has been a success? (30)
● Evaluate the view that devolution should be extended in England. (30)
● Evaluate the view that devolution has been good for Wales and Scotland but not for
England and Northern Ireland. (30)
● Evaluate the view that devolution undermines the unity of the UK. (30)
● Evaluate the view that devolution has had a positive impact on UK politics. (30)
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover 1
Potential Devolution Essay Questions/Key Debates 1
How, When and Why Was Devolution Introduced? 2
How and When Was Devolution Introduced? 2
Why Was Devolution Introduced? 3
How Is Power Devolved In Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and England? 3
󰧺 Scotland 󰧺 3
󰧻 Wales 󰧻 6
󰏅 Northern Ireland 󰏅 7
󰧹 England 󰧹 8
Overall Notes On Devolution 13
The Barnett Formula 13
How Attitudes To Devolution Have Changed Over Time 13
Examples Of Policy Differences 17
🗣 Debates Over Devolution 🗣 20
📋 Potential Further Reforms To Devolution 📋 23
Further Devolution To Existing Devolved Bodies 23
󰧹 Overall Arguments For Further Devolution To England 󰧹 24
󰧹 English Parliament 󰧹 24
Completing Regional Devolution In England 25
How, When and Why Was Devolution Introduced?
How and When Was Devolution Introduced?
● Devolution was included in Labour’s 1997 election manifesto.
● After winning the election, referendums were held in each of the proposed devolved
authority jurisdictions.
○ Wales and Scotland voted for devolution in referendums in 1997
○ Northern Ireland and London voted for devolution in referendums in 1998. For
Northern Ireland, the vote was part of a vote on the Good Friday Agreement.
● Parliament then passed the Scotland Act 1998, Northern Ireland Act 1998, Government of
Wales Act 1998 and Greater London Authority Act 1999 to implement the referendum
results.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 2
Why Was Devolution Introduced?
● Devolution was introduced in part to provide an expression for nationalism, silence calls for
independence and to satisfy the calls for greater autonomy and democracy.
● It was part of New Labour’s wider constitutional reform programme to modernise and
democratise Britain.
● It was believed that devolution would result in improved public services and economic
conditions.
How Is Power Devolved In Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland
and England?
󰧺 Scotland 󰧺
How has devolution developed in Scotland?
● The Scottish Parliament was created by the Scotland Act 1998 which gave the devolved
body significant legislative and tax varying powers. It was given the most powers out of all
of the devolved bodies, due to Scotland’s strong nationalist movement.
○ Including control over most public services; health, education, justice, agriculture
and most transport. Can therefore be seen as ‘service devolution’. The powers
reserved for Westminster were listed (including defence, macroeconomic policy,
foreign policy, constitutional matter etc.), with the left reserved for Scotland.
● Until 2007 Labour was in power. Since 2007 the Scottish National Party has been in
government. They are currently in government in a coalition with the Greens, with John
Swinney as First Minister.
○ The SNP supports independence and is pushing for a second independence
referendum.
● In the run up to and since the 2014 Scottish Independence Referendum, Scotland has
gained more powers in order to try and satisfy calls for more autonomy and disincentivise
independence.
○ This was in particular in the Scotland Act 2016, which gave the Scottish Parliament
further powers, particularly in the area of tax raising (including the power to set all
income tax rates and bands.) This can be seen as fiscal devolution.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 3
Which powers does the Scottish Parliament have now?
● Scotland has the most power of all the devolved bodies.
● It controls key public services including health and social policy, key welfare benefits
(including disability living allowance) and education, as well as environment policy, law and
home affairs, economic development, housing, planning and transport.
● It now has significant fiscal powers, controlling income tax rates and bands and the right to
50% of all VAT raised in Scotland. Holyrood now raises around 60% of the money it
spends.
○ In 2023, the Scottish Parliament voted to increase the higher and top rates of
income tax, so that both rates are now 2% higher than in the rest of the UK.
● The Scottish Parliament also has key constitutional powers.
○ It controls its own composition and electoral system and since the Scotland Act
2016 can only be abolished with a referendum, making it a permanent part of the
UK constitution.
○ The 2016 Scotland Act also enshrined the Sewel Convention into law. This means
that Westminster must ask Holyrood for permission if legislating on a devolved
matter.
Increased Defence Spending In Scotland As An Example Of The Unity Of The UK And
Reserved Powers:
● In February 2025, Prime Minister Keir Starmer announced a raise in defence spending to
2.5% of GDP by 2027. The Chancellor highlighted that this would boost jobs and wages in
Scotland after announcing a £2bn increase to support defence exports.
○ This is because Scotland is a hub for the UK defence industry’s manufacturing,
supporting 25,000 jobs. As a result, Scotland’s economy will benefit from the
increase in spending.
● Due to the fact that defence and macro-economic policy fall within powers reserved to
Westminster, the decision made by Starmer affected the whole of the UK, rather than just
England as is the case in other policy areas.
● This shows the benefits of the current devolution framework, as important national security
policy areas are restricted to Westminster and apply across the UK. This ensures coherent,
unified policy on key policy areas - driven by the UK Parliament and Government - whilst
still allowing local concerns to be addressed in other policy areas such as health.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 4
What happened in the Supreme Court’s Scotland Act Ruling in November 2022 and
what does it show?
● The uncodified nature of the UK constitution led to it not being clear who can legislate for
an independence referendum in Scotland. Parliamentary sovereignty is important, but often
disputed in relation to Scotland, especially as it is seen to compete with the popular
sovereignty of the Scottish people.
○ The first (2014) independence referendum was legislated for by a special
agreement between the UK and Scottish Governments (the Edinburgh Agreement),
which was then approved by the UK Parliament.
○ There was no such agreement for a second independence referendum, with the UK
parliament and government not consenting to one. The Scottish Government
nonetheless sought to argue that it could legislate for a referendum itself under the
Scotland Act, arguing that this power wasn’t reserved to the UK Parliament.
● In November 2022, the UK Supreme Court ruled that the Scotland Act (1998) doesn’t give
the Scottish Parliament the power to unilaterally legislate for an independence referendum.
Instead, it is a reserved power of the UK Parliament; ‘the Union of the Kingdoms of
Scotland and England’ is reserved. Nicola Sturgeon and the Scottish Government accepted
the judgement.
● This shows the power of the UK Supreme Court to clarify the powers of different parts of
the UK political system, particularly devolved bodies. It also showed the continued validity
of the principle of parliamentary sovereignty.
The SNP’s Declining Popularity
● Since 2023, the Scottish National Party (SNP) has seen a notable decline in popularity,
influenced by several key factors.
○ This was particularly driven by a significant scandal involving a police investigation
into the party's finances. This led to the arrest of Nicola Sturgeon’s husband and
SNP chief executive Peter Murrell, as well as the resignation of Sturgeon as party
leader and first minister.
■ Not only did this lead to declining trust in the party, it also overshadowed the
next SNP leader Humza Yousaf’s leadership.
○ Yousaf, who resigned in April 2024 after a breakdown in government, was an
unpopular leader who failed to unite the party. His approval ratings were consistently
lower than Sturgeon’s.
■ Under his leadership, there were significant divisions over gender and how
strongly the party should push for independence in particular.
■ The SNP has also been criticised for a drop in school performance and
dissatisfaction with the management of the NHS, which saw increasing
waiting times and staff shortages.
○ John Swinney took over the party just a couple of months before the 2024 election,
by which time Labour had overtaken the SNP in Scotland in the polls.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 5
Potential future reforms:
● There are few further powers that can be devolved to the Scottish Parliament as it already
holds a great amount of power.
● There are some, though, and ‘devomax’ could be introduced to prevent growing calls for
independence.
○ Many polls suggest that if there was an IndyRef2, then the Scottish public would
vote for independence.
● The more powers that are devolved to Scotland, the more pertinent the West Lothian
question becomes, though.
󰧻 Wales 󰧻
How has devolution developed in Wales?
● Wales started with far fewer powers than Scotland or Northern Ireland, as there was little
nationalist sentiment in Wales and the 1997 referendum on Welsh devolution was very
close; a majority of 50.5% on a 50% turnout.
○ At first, Wales only had the Welsh Assembly that had no legislative powers or 1st
minister. It was only granted administrative devolution.
● Over the years, Wales has gained more powers in response to growing nationalism and
public support for devolution. This was in particular after the 2011 Welsh Devolution
Referendum, which saw a 64% vote for primary legislative powers, and the 2017 Wales
Act, which gave Wales further powers and renamed the Welsh Assembly the Welsh
Parliament.
● Since 1999 Labour have always been in power alone or in coalition. Eluned Morgan is the
current First Minister.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 6
Which powers does Wales now have?
● Especially since the 2017 Wales Act, the Welsh Parliament has gained a lot more powers,
though it still has fewer powers than the Scottish Parliament and Northern Irish Parliament
do.
○ As with Scotland and Northern Ireland, the powers reserved for Westminster are
now set out, with the Welsh Parliament able to legislate on the rest. It can be seen
as ‘service devolution’.
● The Welsh Parliamentnow controls health and social services, education, the environment,
housing, economic development and its own composition and elections, among other
areas.
● It also collects 10% of Wales’ income taxes and can vary the bands and rates for this 10%.
● It still doesn’t control law and order (including policing and legal jurisdiction) like the
Scottish Parliament does, as the UK government blocked it.
Potential future reforms:
● Welsh independence is growing in popularity, with some polls over 30% support. This may
lead to greater devolution in Wales, with calls for Wales to have the same powers as
Scotland
● This may also have been influenced by the COVID period, in which Wales demonstrated it
could diverge from England on issues, often successfully.
󰏅 Northern Ireland 󰏅
How has devolution developed in Northern Ireland?
● Devolution to Northern Ireland was introduced in 1998 as part of a broader peace process
between Catholics and Protestants (nationalists and unionists) following the 1998 Good
Friday Agreement.
○ Power sharing was key to this process. The executive must be led by a First
Minister and Deputy First Minister and several key decisions, including the budget
and programme for government, require cross-community support.
● Government in Stormont is very fragile, though, with frequent suspensions in which the
parties refuse to work together in government. During these suspensions, government
functions are decided directly by the government in Westminster, during which some
significant changes have been made, including the legalisation of same sex marriage.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 7
○ The Northern Irish government was suspended between February 2022 and
February 2024. For the first time, Sinn Fein was voted the largest party in May
2022, but the Democratic Unionist Party then refused to nominate a speaker and
form a government with Michelle O’Neil (Leader of Sinn Fein) as First Minister.
● Overall, Stormont has been suspended for nearly half of the total time since it was founded.
○ This shows how the structure of Northern Irish Devolution, which requires power
sharing, often leads to failure in governance and control having to be still exerted by
the UK Parliament.
Which powers does Northern Ireland now have?
● In 1998, Northern Ireland was (like Scotland) given primary legislative control over areas
not reserved for Westminster. Apart from corporation tax and policing and justice being
devolved, the Northern Irish Assembly has gained few power since and still lacks major tax
raising powers.
● Like Wales, it now has ‘service devolution’ and controls health and social services,
education, the environment, housing, economic development and its own composition and
elections, among other areas.
● The Assembly can also legislate on some reserved matters with the support of the Northern
Ireland secretary.
Potential future reforms:
● Further devolution is unlikely as unionists are very opposed.
● A referendum on reunification with the Republic of Ireland is possible, though, especially as
it is estimated that Catholics now outnumber Protestants in Northern Ireland.
󰧹 England 󰧹
How has devolution developed in England?
● Unlike the other devolved bodies, England doesn’t have a parliament and devolution in
England is defined by variation and inconsistency.
○ Certain powers were devolved to the Greater London Authority in 1998. In the rest
of England, there is a patchwork of arrangements, with many areas having no
devolution.
● New Labour proposed Regional Assemblies in the early 2000s, but dropped the idea after a
2004 referendum on a Regional Assembly in the North East of England received a 78% no
vote.
● The Coalition/Conservatives then sought to promote the ‘Northern Powerhouse’, promoting
transport links and greater investment.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 8
○ They introduced city regions with elected ‘metro mayors’, including in Manchester,
Sheffield and Liverpool. Labour’s Andy Burnham in Manchester is the most high
profile Metro Mayor, challenging the government loudly during COVID.
Further English Devolution Introduced In 2023 and 2024
● Following new devolved bodies introduced in 2024, devolved bodies including combined
authorities and/or directly elected metro mayors now cover 64% of the English population
and over 90% of the population in the North.
○ None of these devolved bodies have primary legislative control like in Scotland,
Wales or Northern Ireland, but they do have significant administrative control and,
increasingly, also financial autonomy, with a specific focus on transport and regional
economic growth.
Trailblazer Devolution Deals To Greater Manchester:
● In March 2023, the UK government introduced two Trailblazer Devolution Deals for Greater
Manchester and the West Midlands. These deals didn’t grant legislative control, but did give
the regions substantial administrative control and funding autonomy over important areas of
policy.
○ They devolved control over post-19 skills education, affordable housing programs,
and infrastructure investment, therefore giving the authorities significant control over
regional economic development.
● This built on the existing control both areas had over transport and the influence Greater
Manchester has in health and social care, setting a precedent for future "Level 4"
devolution; English regions that can have significant administrative control.
2023 Autumn Statement Introduces 4 New Devolution Settlements Including North East:
● The 2023 Autumn Statement expanded English devolution by introducing new devolved
bodies for the North East, Greater Lincolnshire, Hull and East Yorkshire, and Lancashire.
● The North East was particularly significant because it aligned its powers with Greater
Manchester (‘level 4’ devolution) by gaining control over areas including transportation,
economic development, skills funding, and affordable housing.
○ The devolved area therefore has significant control. It became operational in May
2024 after Labour candidate Kim McGuinness, its first mayor, was elected.
○ This is the same devolved area that was rejected in a 2004 election, with a 78% no
vote.
● This further devolution demonstrates the commitment of the Conservative Party to
devolving power in England.
Labour’s “Devolution Revolution” - Further English Devolution:
● In December 2024 the Labour Government released its devolution white paper which
announced greater powers to English regional mayors. Whilst not as extensive as the
settlements afforded to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, this still represents a
significant increase in their power and devolution’s coverage.
○ The white paper commits the government to pushing forward full devolution
coverage of England with extended powers, similar to those of the West Midlands
and Manchester.
○ The White Paper noted that 90% of the population in the North is covered by a
devolved body, but just 46% of the South of England is, which they intend to
improve.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 9
● Since the Labour government was elected in 2024, 2 new mayoral and 6 non mayoral
devolution agreements have been signed and they have granted more powers to existing
mayors.
○ Mayors were given more powers for strategic planning, housing, transport and skills,
as well as plans for more cohesive links with the department for Business and
Trade. Mayors will take a prominent role in delivering the Government's pledge to
build 1.5 million homes across the parliament.
○ Mayors in Greater Manchester, the West Midlands, South Yorkshire and Liverpool
will alsp receive multi-year integrated funding settlements allowing them greater
autonomy over how they implement plans inline with local preferences.
■ This resembles the funding model enjoyed by the Devolved assemblies and
brings England closer to the rest of the UK, with a significant transfer of
power from Whitehall closer to the people.
● This has significant constitutional implications - full coverage of England would establish
English devolution as a permanent tier of government with its own distinct functions and
responsibilities, signifying a shift away from the piecemeal and inconsistent patchwork of
powers currently across England.
○ This would also reduce the assymetric nature of devolution.
Which powers does England now have?
Greater London Authority:
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 10
● London has the most devolved powers in England, controlled by a directly elected mayor
and elected London Assembly.
○ London Mayors are important political figures. The current London Mayor is Sadiq
Khan, before him were Boris Johnson and Ken Livingstone.
● The Greater London Authority has strategic responsibility and power over policing,
transport and economic development.
○ It has been able to reform transport, with Ken Livingstone introducing the
congestion charge and free travel for young people being introduced.
City Regions/Combined Authorities:
● City regions/combined authorities are modelled in many ways on London and intended to
boost regional economies.
● Each city region has negotiated its own arrangements and powers on a bespoke basis.
○ Greater Manchester has blazed a trail in gaining substantial control over health,
though the focus of most deals is on transport, infrastructure and other areas linked
to generating economic growth, such as business retention, education and skills.
○ The devolution of some healthcare policy to Greater Manchester has been linked to
modest increases in life expectancy.
● These deals are less substantial devolution than that to Scotland or Wales, for example, as
they are only ‘administrative devolution’ (or control over implementation), rather than
‘legislative devolution’.
The West Lothian Question and English Votes For English Laws (EVEL)
● Power being devolved to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland raised the West Lothian
Question.
○ This questioned why Scottish MPs should be able to vote on English matters in the
UK Parliament that don’t affect their constituents, when English MPs can’t do the
same in the Scottish Parliament.
● In order to seek to tackle this, EVEL was introduced in 2015. This allowed English MPs to
veto any legislation affecting England only from being passed. It didn’t, however, allow
English MPs to make their own laws.
○ It wasn’t used often (only for around ⅓ of bills in the 2015-17 parliament). It may
have become more significant if a government was elected with a majority in the UK
but not in England.
● It was criticised for creating two tiers of MPs, adding unnecessary complications and not
providing a viable expression for English identity and was scrapped by Boris Johnson’s
government in July 2021.
The Scottish Vote On The Assisted Dying Bill As An Example Of The West Lothian Question:
● On the 2nd reading of the Terminally Ill Adults (End of Life) Bill 2024, the SNP’s 9 MPs
voluntarily sat out of the debate and didn’t vote. This is because the bill affected only those
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 11
in England and Wales and had no provisions which would impact Scotland, whilst Holyrood
was considering its own version of the bill.
○ The SNP MPs in Westminster said the bill does not affect the people they are
elected to represent and therefore they would not vote on it.
● However, 46 Scottish MPs from other parties (mostly Labour) did vote, and voted
overwhelmingly against the bill despite its majority support by English and Welsh MPs and
the bill not affecting their constituents.
● This is a good example of the West Lothian Question and the issues raised by Devolution -
why can't English MPs vote on devolved matters that affect only the Scottish region, but
Scottish MPs can vote on matters which only affect England?
○ Whilst the issue was previously addressed by English votes for English laws
(EVEL), this was scrapped in 2021 meaning there is no constitutional safeguard
against Scottish MPs passing a law that a majority of English MPs don’t support.
● This example could be used to support further English devolution and potentially even an
elected English Parliament, as England should be treated as a distinct nation with primary
legislative competence and representatives from other parts of the UK shouldn’t be able to
influence decisions that only affect England.
English Devolution and Democracy
Strong Personal Support For Some Mayors Of City Regions:
● One key way in which devolution can be seen as good for democracy is that mayors of
city-regions in the UK can generate significant personal support if they are judged to
effectively represent their city and improve policy.
● This can be seen in the May 2024 Mayoral elections, when Labour mayors Sadiq Khan and
Andy Burnham were both reelected for third terms, in London and Greater Manchester
respectively.
○ Burnham won with 63.4% of the vote, with his closest competitor getting just over
10% of the vote. Burnham has been praised as a mayor for his effective
representation of Manchester nationally, as well as a country-leading approach to
tackling homelessness and improvement in the city’s transport.
● In the same elections, Conservative mayor Ben Houchen won his third consecutive term
with 53.6% of the vote, bucking the trend across the country in the May 2024 elections, in
which every other mayoral race was won by the Labour Party.
○ Houchen has been praised for his focus on economic regeneration and his efforts to
transform the former steelworks site at Teesworks into a hub for renewable energy
and advanced manufacturing. He also gained support for successfully bringing
Teesside Airport under public control.
Low Turnout For Mayoral Elections:
● It can be argued that English devolution isn’t effective at improving democracy in the UK, as
the May 2024 Mayoral elections attracted very low turnouts. This suggests that a majority of
voters don’t care about/support devolution to city regions, whilst it can also be seen as
undermining the legitimacy of the elected mayors, who lack majority support.
○ In Greater Manchester: Andy Burnham was re-elected with a turnout of just 32%,
slightly lower than the previous election in 2021.
○ In Tees Valley, Ben Houchen won on a 30.8% turnout, also down compared to 2021
○ The turnout in the 2024 London mayoral election was also lower than in previous
elections. It was just 40.5%, down from 42% in 2021
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 12
Overall Notes On Devolution
The Barnett Formula
● The Barnett Formula is the system used to determine the amount of funding given to each
devolved body (Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland).
● It was originally drawn up as a short term mechanism in 1979 and doesn’t take into account
relative need (Wales receives less than Scotland despite being poorer), with England
effectively subsidising the other three nations, hitting deprived areas of England the
hardest.
○ In 2022/23 public spending per person in the UK as a whole was £12,549.
■ In England, it was £12,227 (3% below the UK average).
■ In Scotland, it was £14,456 (15% above the UK average)
■ In Wales it £13,967 (11% above the UK average)
■ In Northern Ireland, it was £14,453 (15% above the UK average).
● Neither Labour nor the Conservatives have sought to replace it, fearing political
repercussions from voters in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
● In the Scottish Independence Referendum, all three main parties in Westminster pledged
their support to continue it, whilst Nigel Farage criticised it and argued it should be
scrapped when he was leader of UKIP, as he saw it as being unfair to the population of
England.
How Attitudes To Devolution Have Changed Over Time
Change Through Different Prime Ministers
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 13
Blair, Brown, Cameron and May Supportive:
● Since Tony Blair introduced devolution in 1997, all UK Prime Ministers were supportive of it,
with further devolution to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland under the Coalition
Government and Conservative Governments of Cameron and May.
○ Devolution continued to be seen as positive in terms of democracy and key to trying
to keep the union together in the face of growing nationalism, particularly in
Scotland.
Shift Under Johnson, Truss and Sunak:
● Boris Johnson was significantly different, describing devolution as a “disaster” and Tony
Blair’s “biggest mistake” in November 2020 and failing to work closely with devolved
administrations when in power, with frequent clashes with the Scottish and Welsh
governments over COVID policies and constant criticism of Nicola Sturgeon in particular.
● Liz Truss seemed to continue Johnson’s approach and Rishi Sunak increased tensions by
using a Section 35 Order to block Scotland’s proposed gender reform bill, which would’ve
introduced self-identification for those who wanted to change gender and allowed 16 and
17 year olds to do so.
○ Section 35 of the Scotland Act allows the UK Government to block a bill from a
devolved body in exceptional circumstances if it believes it will have an adverse
impact on UK-wide law.
○ Then First Minister Nicola Sturgeon strongly criticised the use of the Section 35
order, tweeting “This is a full-frontal attack on our democratically elected Scottish
parliament and it’s ability to make its own decisions on devolved matters. @scotgov
will defend the legislation and stand up for Scotland’s parliament. If this Westminster
veto succeeds, it will be first of many.”
Starmer’s Strong Support For Devolution:
● Starmer and Labour’s 2024 manifesto have returned to far more supportive rhetoric in
relation to devolution. The manifesto stated that the UK ‘remains too centralised’ and
committed to reset relations with the devolved governments.
○ This became clear early in Starmer’s reign. He visited Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland within days of becoming Prime Minister and held a meeting with all of
England’s regional mayors on his fifth day of office.
● In October 2024, Prime Minister Keir Starmer chaired the first meeting of the new Council
Of The Nations And Regions. The council was created to tackle the challenges of power
sharing, and consists of the leaders of all the devolved governments as well as the
metro-mayors.
○ Further, it committed to address and reduce breaches of the Sewel Convention by
setting out a new memorandum of understanding (MoU), outlining how the nations
will work together for the common good.
○ This is notable as under previous administrations, power sharing has caused
tensions and fractious relations.
● As part of his “Devolution Revolution” Starmer has promised a reset of relations. Within the
meeting leaders discussed £24 billion of private investments in renewable energy UK wide,
and the First Minister of Northern Ireland pushed the PM for a fairer funding model.
● In relation to England, Labour committed to both deepen devolution settlements for existing
mayors and combined authorities (more powers) and to widen devolution to more areas.
○ Suggested further powers including adult education, housing and employment
support.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 14
○ This highlights how the Council can be used to coordinate between devolved
governments - reducing confusion over where responsibility lies and allowing open
communication (something which broke down under Johnson). This shows how
Devolution doesn't necessarily threaten the unity of the UK and cause separatism.
The Welsh First Minister’s Criticisms Of The Government As An Example Tensions Between
Devolved Bodies And Westminster:
● In May 2025, Welsh FM Eluned Morgan said she will "call out" Labour in Westminster when
it "gets it wrong for Wales”.
○ She called for UK ministers to halt part of its plans to cut disability benefits, rethink
cuts to the winter fuel allowance, and demanded Wales benefit more from wind
power via the Crown Estate as Scotland does.
○ The fact that the leader of a devolved body is calling out the government clearly
shows tensions between the Senedd and Westminster.
■ These tensions are exacerbated by the fact that this is a Labour Welsh FM
which thereby shows the increasing autonomy that devolved bodies feel as
the FM went above party loyalty to serve the Welsh people’s interests.
● Furthermore, this speech was made following a YouGov opinion poll saying Welsh Labour
has slumped to a historic low, being supported by just 18% of the Welsh public, with Plaid
Cymru in the lead at 30%.
○ This demonstrates how devolution is threatening the unity of the UK as there is
increasing support for independence movements and even the Labour Party in
Wales seem to be supporting divergence from central government.
COVID-19 and Devolution
Policy Differences:
● In the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic, policy was very similar across all parts of
the United Kingdom, with the Prime Minister and First Ministers of each devolved country
participating in joint meetings up until early June.
○ As time went on, however, policy began to diverge and there were tensions between
the leaders of different parts of the United Kingdom.
○ England and Northern Ireland lifted restrictions after the first lockdown quicker than
Scotland and Wales did, opening non-essential retail as well as pubs and
restaurants. Other policy differences followed, including in relation to GCSE and A
Level results in 2021.
○ At different points in the pandemic, different parts of the United Kingdom also had
different levels of success in managing the spread of the virus.
Increased Tensions and Visibility:
● Especially due to the nature of COVID being able to spread between populations of each
devolved body, this led to increased tensions and criticisms.
○ Nicola Sturgeon criticised Boris Johnson for using the Covid crisis as a “political
weapon” and repealing restrictions too quickly.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 15
○ Mark Drakeford accused Boris Johnson for “disrespecting the people of Wales” and
called the PM “really, really awful” for neglecting the Welsh population in the way he
formulated and announced COVID policies.
○ There was also criticism within England. Andy Burnham very publicly criticised the
UK Government in October 2020 for failing to provide sufficient financial support to
businesses forced to shut by government policies in the second lockdown.
● COVID also led to leaders of devolved bodies becoming household names and gaining
notoriety due to public announcements and policy decisions that had a tangible impact on
people’s lives. Devolution itself became far more visible and high profile.
Tensions Between Devolved Bodies and Sunak’s Government
Strikes (Minimum Service Levels) Act 2023 Passed Despite Devolved Bodies Witholding
Consent - Breaking the Sewel Convention:
● The Sewel Convention holds that the UK Parliament shouldn’t legislate on devolved areas
for the whole of the UK without a consent motion from the devolved bodies.
● Despite the law relating to public services, which are devolved, and the Scottish and Welsh
Parliaments withholding their consent, the UK Parliament passed the Strikes (Minimum
Service Levels) Act 2023.
○ The devolved governments, particularly in Scotland and Wales, opposed the act,
viewing it as an infringement on their rights to manage public services and industrial
relations, whilst arguing that it undermines workers' rights.
○ The UK government proceeded with the legislation, citing the need for continuity of
critical public services, such as health, transport, and education, to protect public
welfare.
● This shows a continued trend of the Sewel Convention being broken. This also happened
with a number of important laws related to Brexit, including the Withdrawal Agreement that
was objected to by all 3 devolved parliaments and the Internal Market Act 2020, that aimed
to improve free trade within the UK, but for which consent was witheld by the Sennedd and
Scottish Parliament.
Andy Burnham Strongly Criticises Cancelling Of HS2 Expansion:
● In October 2023, Andy Burnham, the Mayor of Greater Manchester, strongly criticised
Prime Minister Rishi Sunak and the Conservative government for canceling the northern leg
of the HS2 high-speed rail project.
○ Burnham described the decision as a betrayal of the North, stating it left people in
the region feeling "completely short-changed and let down."
○ He emphasised how vital the HS2 expansion was for leveling up the UK's economic
disparity and improving connectivity between northern cities.
● This shows how there is significant tension between devolved bodies and how devolved
leaders can be important leaders in criticising UK-wide policies.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 16
Examples Of Policy Differences
Higher Education As Example Of Policy Difference
● As Education is an area of policy controlled by all devolved bodies, higher education is a
useful example to use to show policy difference. This is in particular as the Conservative
Party has been in power in England (in coalition, minority or majority government) since
2010, whilst more left wing governments have been in power in Scotland and Wales.
○ 󰧹 In England, the coalition government increased tuition fees to up to £9,250 per
year for home students and scrapped most grants.
○ 󰧺 In Scotland, tuition fees for home students were scrapped in part by the
Labour-Lib Dem coalition government in 2001 and then completely by the SNP in
2008.
○ 󰧻 In Wales, tuition fees for homes students are capped at £9,000 per year and
there is a £1,000 grant to help with living costs for all students, with higher grants for
those from lower income households.
○ 󰏅 In Northern Ireland, tuition fees for home students are capped at £4,630 per year
and there are maintenance grants for students from lower income households.
Health As Example Of Policy Difference
● Health policy is also a really useful example of policy differences. Not only do Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland have control over health policy, the city region of Greater
Manchester has also gained significant control in a bespoke deal.
○ In England there is a prescription charge of £9.35 per item, whilst in Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland, prescription charges have been abolished.
○ In Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland there is also greater financial support for
the costs of care for the elderly than there is in England.
■ In Scotland, there is free long-term care for the elderly, whilst in Northern
Ireland most care in the home is free for those aged over 75.
○ In 2015, the Greater Manchester city region was given ‘devolved control’ over the
health budget for the city-region. This should be seen as ‘administrative devolution’,
with the implementation devolved rather than any legislative powers.
■ Much of health policy is similar to the rest of England, however there have
also been changes, including a more joined up approach to care and greater
funding for mental health care relative to other healthcare funding.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 17
Recent Examples Of Policy Divergence And Devolved Control Over Policy
Policy Divergence In Wales On Health Rules As An Example Of Policy Differences And
Devolution:
● In March 2025, the Welsh Senedd introduced new health legislation to alter how unhealthy
food is marketed. The Food (Promotion and Presentation) (Wales) Regulations Act (2025)
bans supermarkets from displaying unhealthy food near tills and on the end of asiles.
○ This is to tackle Wales's growing obesity problem, where it is the nation with the
highest obesity rate in the UK, costing the Welsh economy £3 billion annually.
● This shows how the Welsh Assembly, especially since the 2017 Wales Act, controls many
services including health and social services and has significant autonomy to respond to
the needs of their populations.
● Heath is an area controlled by all devolved bodies and is a useful example to show policy
difference. Compared to Wales, the Conservative Government introduced measures to
tackle HSFF food in 2022, whilst Scotland is yet to introduce new legislation.
○ This shows how there is significant variation in policy across the UK and
divergences in policy mean that different citizens have different access to
healthcare, education etc. and are subject to different laws.
Free School Meals For All Primary School Children In London:
● Free school meals for all primary school students in London were introduced in September
2023. This £135/year initiative by Labour mayor Sadiq Khan cost-of-living pressures on
families while also ensuring that no child goes hungry during the school day.
● In contrast, in the rest of England, only children from low-income families continue to
receive free school meals. This divergence highlights the differing approaches to
addressing child poverty across England and the influence of English devolution.
Scottish Parliament Further Increases Taxes In 2023 Budget:
● In the 2023-24 budget, the Scottish Parliament increased the higher and top rates of
income tax by 1%, so that both are now 2% higher than in the rest of the UK.
○ This shows how devolution leads to policy divergence and how Scotland’s more left
wing population has elected a more left wing government that has reflected its
support for greater taxation to facilitate public spending.
○ It also shows the significant powers of taxation held by the Scottish Parliament.
● Sunak criticised the increase for putting too much of a burden on Scottish taxpayers and
said that he hoped the UK government’s national insurance reduction (from 10% to 8% for
employers) in the 2023 budget would provide relief, as national insurance isn’t devolved so
this applied to the whole of the UK.
Welsh Assembly Number Of Members Increased And Electoral System Changed:
● The Senedd approved legislation to increase the number of its members from 60 to 96.
This legislative change was introduced with the Senedd Cymru (Members and Elections)
Bill, which was published on September 18, 2023.
○ They also changed from the Additional Member System to a closed party list system
with 6-member constituencies, similar to Single Transferable Vote but with less
flexibility to choose between candidates of the same party.
● The reforms are part of a broader strategy to enhance the capacity of the Senedd to
scrutinise government actions and represent the Welsh people more effectively. The
changes are set to take effect from the next Welsh election, which is scheduled for 2026.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 18
● This shows how the devolved bodies have the power to control their own constitution and
makeup.
Scotland Introduces First Legal Drug Consumption Room Despite Drug Policy Being Reserved
- Examples Of Policy Laboratory:
● In September 2023, Scotland introduced the first legal drug consumption room (DCR) in the
UK, in Glasgow. Designed to address drug-related deaths due to injections, the DCR
provides a safe, supervised space where individuals can consume pre-obtained drugs with
sterile equipment and medical oversight.
○ The policy was introduced despite drug policy being a reserved power of the UK
government and drug consumption rooms being illegal across the UK.
○ It was able to be introduced due to cooperation between the Scottish Government,
Scottish health authorities and the UK government, with Police Scotland saying it
wouldn’t prosecute drug users in the facility.
● This shows how devolved bodies can be used as policy laboratories to test policies for the
whole of the UK, along with how there are instances of collaboration between the UK and
Scottish Governments to allow for policies to be passed on reserved policies, rather than
there just being tensions.
How Successful Are Devolved Bodies At Improving Policy Outcomes?
Devolved Bodies Fall Behind England On Key Health and Education Measures:
● In August 2023, the Guardian reported that the devolved bodies had fallen behind England
in some key measures of NHS performance, despite them having significantly higher per
capita spending on health than England.
○ 1 in every 150 people in England are on NHS waiting lists for more than a year. You
are twice as likely to be on a year-plus waiting list in Scotland or Northern Ireland,
with 1 in 80 on NHS waiting lists for more than a year. It is much worse in Wales,
with 1 in 20 people on NHS waiting lists for more than a year.
○ In 2021/22, Scotland spent £3,490 per person on health, compared to £3,192 per
capita in England.
● There are also significant differences in educational attainment between England and the
rest of the UK. Scotland and Wales have fallen behind England in the PISA ranking
(international rankings that measure educational performance).
○ Further, in Scotland recent studies reveal that 15-year-olds from poorer families are
generally two to three years behind their wealthier peers in reading, math, and
science. The gap is similar in Wales.
○ Comparatively, in England, the gap is about 18 months.
Transport Systems Better In Devolved Bodies Than In England:
● A good example of devolution leading to better governance outcomes is in relation to
transport, which is controlled by almost all devolved bodies, including those in England.
● In 2022, the Scottish government nationalised rail by bringing ScotRail under public
ownership. The Scottish government also subsidises rail fares, which leads to far cheaper
rail fares than in England.
○ For example, an off peak return from Glasgow to Edinburgh is around £10, whereas
a similar journey in England would likely be at least 3x the amount.
● Andy Burnham has made a number of significant changes to local transport since
becoming mayor of Greater Manchester.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 19
○ He has brought the bus service under local control, leading to fares being capped at
£2, even before they were in England.
○ He has also introduced the ‘Bee Network’; a network of walking and cycling paths
aiming to connect every community in Greater Manchester.
● This shows how devolution can lead to more effective policy and governance in some
areas.
The UK Government’s Investment Into Regional Transport In The North Of England As An
Example Of The Positive Impact Of Devolution:
● In March 2025, Keir Starmer announced £415m of funding to improve rail links between
Huddersfield, Manchester, Leeds and York.
○ Downing Street also announced that local leaders would be given more than £1bn
to boost regional transport, such as West Yorkshire's mass transit system.
○ This announcement came not long after Yorkshire’s three Metro Mayors united
under a new White Rose Agreement to champion Yorkshire and work together
across key areas priorities including improving rail connectivity.
● This shows the positive impact that devolution can bring about as the North had been
underinvested in for years compared to the South of England.
○ Now, with a greater power base thanks to devolution, this area was able to put
increased pressure on the government to improve their regional transport.
🗣 Debates Over Devolution 🗣
🗳The Impact Of Devolution On Democracy 🗳
Arguments that devolution has had a positive impact on democracy:
● Devolution has allowed for more effective representation, with devolved bodies able to
respond to the concerns of their electorates.
○ This can be seen in differences in policy in the areas of COVID, education and
healthcare.
● The more proportional electoral systems in Scotland (AMS), Wales (AMS) and Northern
Ireland (STV) have led to a more representative mix of parties.
● The UK Parliament still theoretically has the power to remove the powers of the devolved
bodies and is therefore still theoretically sovereign.
Arguments that devolution has had a negative impact on democracy:
● Some argue that parliamentary sovereignty is key to British democracy and that devolution
undermines this by moving decision making power away from the UK parliament, which is
elected by the whole of the UK.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 20
● Turnout in devolved assembly elections is generally low. It was just 63.5% in the 2021
Scottish Parliament elections, the same in the 2022 Northern Irish Assembly elections and
46.6% in the 2021 Senedd elections.
● It can be argued that devolution undermines equal citizenship, as divergences in policy
mean that different citizens have different access to healthcare, education etc and are
subject to different laws.
○ Fiscal devolution can also be argued to undermine redistribution of resources from
richer to poorer areas, whilst the Barnett Formula can be seen as unfair and
undemocratic.
󰏅The Impact Of Devolution On The Unity Of The UK 󰏅
Arguments that devolution has had a positive impact on the unity of the UK:
● No nationalist movement has yet achieved independence and it can be argued that
devolution has satisfied some demands for self-government and therefore helped to avoid
the break up of the UK.
● Devolution has led to a relatively stable peace in Northern Ireland, providing the framework
for building long-term change.
● Recent increases in support for independence can be attributed to the unpopularity and
failure of recent Conservative governments rather than due to devolution itself.
● Starmer’s Labour government has taken a much more supportive and cooperative
approach to the devolved bodies than the previous Conservative governments under
Sunak, Truss and Johnson.
The New Council Of The Regions and Nations As An Example Of Cooperation Between The
UK Government And Devolved Bodies:
● In October 2024, Prime Minister Keir Starmer chaired the first meeting of the new Council
Of The Nations And Regions. The council was created to tackle the challenges of power
sharing, and consists of the leaders of all the devolved governments as well as the
metro-mayors.
○ This is notable as under previous administrations, power sharing has caused
tensions and fractious relations. In 2023 Rishi Sunak used a Section 35 Order to
block the SNP Governments Gender Recognition Bill, and the previous Government
also used the Internal Market Act to block a Scottish Bottle Deposit scheme.
● As part of his “Devolution Revolution” Starmer has promised a reset of relations. Within the
meeting leaders discussed £24 billion of private investments in renewable energy UK wide,
and the First Minister of Northern Ireland pushed the PM for a fairer funding model.
○ This highlights how the Council can be used to coordinate between devolved
governments - reducing confusion over where responsibility lies and allowing open
communication (something which broke down under Johnson). This shows how
Devolution doesn't necessarily threaten the unity of the UK and cause separatism.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 21
Arguments that devolution has had a negative impact on the unity of the UK:
● The asymmetric nature of devolution, with different powers and policies for different parts of
the UK, can be seen as undermining the unity of the UK as different citizens have different
levels of representation, are subjected to different laws and to different policies.
● It can be argued that devolution has fueled increased nationalism and calls for
independence, by showing the ability of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland to govern
themselves and giving nationalist parties and politicians a platform.
○ The SNP has been in power in Scotland since 2007 and almost achieved
independence in 2014. Since then, support among the Scottish population for
independence has increased, with most polls now suggesting there is majority
support for independence.
○ Support for Welsh independence has also increased.
○ In Northern Ireland, the more radical Sinn Fein has become the largest party in the
nationalist bloc and was the largest party following the 2022 Northern Irish
Assembly election.
● Under Sunak, Truss and Johnson, relations between devolved bodies/leaders and the UK
Government were very strained and fragmented, with tensions and a lack of cooperation.
✅The Economic and Policy Impacts Of Devolution (Governance) ✅
Arguments that devolution has had a positive economic and policy impact:
● The scope for experimentation has meant some policies (such as the ban on smoking in
public places) that have been tried in Scotland and other devolved bodies, have been
adopted across the whole of the UK.
● Devolution has allowed for policy that reflects the interests of local populations, as can be
seen in policy divergences over COVID, healthcare and education.
○ The Scottish Government recently increased the higher and top rates of income tax,
so that both rates are now 2% higher than in the rest of the UK.
● In some areas, more effective policymaking can be seen as a result of devolution.
○ In Greater Manchester, for example, greater control over health policy has been
correlated with modest increases in life expectancy in some cases.
Arguments that devolution has had a negative economic and policy impact:
● Overall, little ‘devolution dividend’ in terms of economic and policy improvements can be
discerned, with devolved bodies even falling behind in some areas.
○ Scottish education has been drastically changed by the SNP, but Scotland has since
fallen behind England in the PISA (Programme for International Student
Assessment) rankings.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 22
● It can be argued that devolution undermines equal citizenship, as divergences in policy
mean that different citizens have different access to healthcare, education etc and are
subject to different laws.
● Some argue that devolved governments, particularly the SNP, focus too much on
independence rather than day-to-day policymaking.
● In Northern Ireland, the governments have been very unstable due to coalitions. Since
being introduced, the Stormont has only sat around half of the time due to failure to
cooperate between Sinn Fein and the DUP. When this is the case, Northern Ireland is run
by the UK Government.
○ In recent years, there has also been significant instability in both Scotland and
Wales, with both countries changing their First Minister in 2024 due to coalitions
proving unstable.
📋 Potential Further Reforms To Devolution 📋
Further Devolution To Existing Devolved Bodies
Arguments For Further Devolution To Existing Devolved Bodies
● Devolved bodies have shown they can run public services and decide policy, including
during the COVID crisis. Giving them greater power would increase their ability to reflect
local opinion and address local issues.
● Brexit allows a lot of policy areas that used to be governed by the EU to be given to
devolved bodies, including in already devolved areas such as agriculture and energy.
● Though Wales is smaller than Scotland and more closely integrated with England, there is
no reason why Cardiff shouldn't gain many of the powers Holyrood already enjoys.
● There is significant scope for more fiscal devolution, particularly to Wales, Northern Ireland
and city-regions in England.
● Further devolution may discourage Scotland from voting for independence.
Arguments Against Further Devolution To Existing Devolved Bodies
● Further devolution, especially in terms of tax raising powers, risks leading to greater
disparities in the public services offered to people and the laws that govern people in the
UK, further undermining equal citizenship.
○ It would also lead to reduced burden sharing between richer and poorer regions.
● Devolved bodies already hold a significant amount of power and there is little demand for
further devolution in any country.
● In many areas of regulation such as food and safety standards and environmental targets,
national policies better protect people and limit the burden on businesses.
● Devolved bodies have failed to prove the economic and political benefits of devolution.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 23
󰧹 Overall Arguments For Further Devolution To England 󰧹
Arguments For Further Devolution To England
● Devolution is currently asymmetric, with England underrepresented within the context of the
whole of the UK. This is especially important as it holds the majority of the UK’s population.
● Further devolution to England could help to solve the ‘West Lothian Question’.
● It could give an outlet for nationalism within England and therefore prevent it being
manifested in divisive ways, like it can be seen as having done in the 2016 Brexit
referendum.
Arguments Against Further Devolution To England
● None of the proposed methods for representing England are practical.
● There is little public appetite for further devolution to England.
● Other measures could be taken to better represent the English population and increase
fairness, rather than further devolution. These include reintroducing and adapting EVEL
and scrapping the Barnett Formula.
󰧹 English Parliament 󰧹
Arguments For An English Parliament
● It would complete devolution within the UK, making it symmetrical and granting the English
population the same level of representation as the rest of the UK.
● It would create a more coherent system of devolution, with a federal UK parliament
responsible for UK-wide issues, as opposed to Westminster currently being responsible for
UK-wide issues combined with English issues.
● It would give English identity and interest effective political and institutional expression.
● It could be combined with the codification of the constitution to establish clear relations
between the UK government and governments of the four nations.
● It would solve the West Lothian Question.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 24
Arguments Against An English Parliament
● An English Parliament would only serve to create another layer of govt and would create
tensions between the English parliament and government and the UK-wide government,
with the former challenging the latter.
● It wouldn’t create a coherent or equal system, as England is much bigger than Scotland,
Wales or Northern Ireland and holds 85% of the UK’s population. Federalism works best
when there is no dominant state or region.
● There is little support for an English Parliament within England.
● Arguments between London and the component nations, over funding and policies,
wouldn't go away.
● Some of those proposing a federal Britain and English Parliament are perhaps just using
the issue to secure a codified constitution, rather than seeing it as a desirable goal in itself.
Completing Regional Devolution In England
● 64% of the English population and over 90% of the population in the North are now covered
by devolved bodies; combined authorities and/or elected mayors.
● ‘Completing’ regional devolution in England could include making combined authorities
cover the whole of England, whilst more powers could also be granted to these bodies.
Arguments For Completing Devolution In England
● More city regions/regional assemblies would bring decision making closer to the people and
address the differing interests of each English region.
● As many consider England too large to have its own parliament, regional assemblies create
a more balanced devolution settlement within the UK.
● Many parts of England, such as Cornwall and Yorkshire, have a strong sense of regional
identity.
Arguments Against More Regional Devolution In England
● It would break up England and fail to provide expression/a platform for English interests
and identity, whilst few areas have a strong sense of regional identity.
● There is the potential for tensions between regional assemblies/city regions and local
government.
● Urban interests would often dominate regional assemblies and drown out rural interests.
● There is little public support for a regional layer of government in England. A 2012
referendum on whether Birmingham should have an elected mayor received a 58% turnout
on just a 27.67% turnout
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 25
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A
Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 26
