1
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover
UK Government
2 Parliament
● 2.2 The comparative powers of the House of Commons and House of Lords.
○ The exclusive powers of the House of Commons.
○ The main powers of the House of Lords.
○ Debates about the relative power of the two Houses.
● 2.3 The legislative process.
○ The different stages a bill must go through to become law.
○ The interaction between the Commons and the Lords during the legislative
process, including the Salisbury Convention.
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓
🗣 Key Debates 🗣
● The key debates in relation to this topic are:
○ Whether Parliament carries out its legislative function effectively.
○ The power balance between the House of Commons and the House of Lords.
○ You could also get a question just on the House of Lords, in which you’d need to
use your knowledge from the Constitution topic also.
● If you make detailed essay plans on the questions in bold below, you should be well
prepared for the exam.
❓Past/Possible Essay Questions❓
● Evaluate the view that Parliament performs its legislative role effectively. (30)
● Evaluate the view that Parliament performs its functions effectively. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the legislative process requires reform. (30)
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 1
● Evaluate the view that in practice the House of Lords exerts more power than the
House of Commons. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the House of Lords is an effective check on the power of the House
of Commons. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the House of Lords plays a meaningful role in UK democracy. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the House of Lords requires reform. (30)
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover 1
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓ 1
📜 The Legislative Process 📜 2
The Different Types Of Bill 2
How A Bill Becomes A Law 4
The Interaction Between The Commons and The Lords During The Legislative Process 6
Secondary Legislation 9
How The House Of Commons’ Legislative Scrutiny Has Decreased 10
The Comparative Powers Of The House Of Commons And House Of Lords 11
The Exclusive Powers Of The House Of Commons 11
The Main Powers Of The House Of Lords 12
⬆ The Growing Power And Assertiveness Of The House Of Lords ⬆ 13
🗣 The Debate Over The Relative Power Of The Two Houses 🗣 16
📜 The Legislative Process 📜
The Different Types Of Bill
Public vs Private Bills
Public Bills:
● The vast majority of bills are ‘Public Bills’ that affect the entire population.
○ These include both government bills and Private Members’ Bills.
Private Bills:
● Private bills affect only organisations, such as local authorities and companies, or only
affect individuals, and give them powers that are beyond or in conflict with the general law.
○ Private bills only change the law as it applies to specific individuals or organisations,
rather than the population as a whole and often come as a result of
organisations/individuals lobbying the government.
○ For example, the University of Manchester Act 2004 facilitated the merger of two
existing Manchester-based universities.
Government Bills vs Private Members’ Bills
Government Bills:
● As the government controls the majority of the parliamentary timetable, most bills are
government bills.
○ These are piloted through the legislative process by ministers and seek to fulfil
manifesto commitments/the government’s agenda.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 2
Private Members’ Bills:
● There are also Private Members’ Bills, which are introduced by backbench MPs and offer a
way of legislating on important issues without dividing parties.
○ There have been notable pieces of legislation that began as Private Members’ Bills,
including the Abortion Act 1967, which legalised abortion, and the Assault On
Emergency Workers Act 2018, which was introduced by Labour MP Chris Bryant.
○ Private Members’ Bills have little chance of getting passed unless they are backed
by the government, though, whilst they are also very susceptible to filibustering as
there is little time in the parliamentary calendar for them.
● There are 3 different ways Private Members’ Bills are introduced:
○ MPs who want to propose a PMB enter a ballot at the start of every parliamentary
session. 20 MPs are chosen at random and they are then able to propose a bill on
one of the 13 Fridays in the Parliamentary session.
■ These are the most likely to succeed, as more time is allocated for them in
the parliamentary calendar.
○ Ten Minute Rule Bills allow a backbench MP to make their case for a new Bill in a
speech lasting up to ten minutes. There can then be an opposing speech before the
House of Commons decides on whether to introduce the bill. If it is successful, then
the Bill is given a first reading.
■ These bills are unlikely to progress further as they aren’t given priority in the
parliamentary calendar, which is dominated by the government.
■ These are often just used to criticise current legislation.
○ Presentation is when MPs introduce a PMB but don’t speak to support it.
■ PMBs very rarely succeed using this method.
The Success Of Government Bills vs Private Member’s Bills In The 2022/23 Parliament:
● In the 2022/23 parliamentary session, the government introduced 56 bills. Of these, 43
(76%) received royal assent by the end of the session.
○ Successful laws included the Illegal Migration Act and Online Safety Act.
● In comparison, in the 2022/23 parliamentary session, 297 Private Member’s Bills were
introduced, of which just 24 (8%) received royal assent by the end of the session.
○ This being said, 16 of the Private Member’s bills introduced by ballot at the start of
the session (the most likely method of getting a PMB passed) were successful.
■ Just 5 bills introduced through Presentation were successful and no
ten-minute bills were successful.
○ Successful bills included the Protection from Sex-based Harassment in Public Act
and the Employment (Allocation of Tips) Act 2023, which ensures that all tips are
guaranteed to workers.
Protection from Sex-based Harassment in Public Act 2023:
● The Protection from Sex-based Harassment in Public Act 2023 is an example of a Private
Member’s Bill that was successfully passed on 18 September 2023, after receiving support
from the government and opposition.
○ It was introduced by ballot by Greg Clark, the Conservative MP for Tunbridge Wells.
● The bill received substantial backing from various campaign groups, including Plan
International UK and Our Streets Now, which had launched a 3 year campaign titled
#crimenotcompliment.
The Controlled Drugs Procedure Bill As An Example Of A Handout Private Members Bill:
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 3
● The Controlled Drugs (Procedure for Specification) Bill is a Private Members Bill introduced
by backbench Labour MP Alex McIntyre, who was successful in the PMB ballot which took
place. This would change the procedure for amending schedule 2 of the Misuse of Drugs
Act 1971, which deals with the classification of banned substances and products.
○ This is an example of a “handout bill” by the government, a bill drafted by
government departments and offered to a backbencher to take forward as a PMB.
○ This usually occurs for bills where the government hasn’t been able to find time in
their legislative programme, allowing them to pass minor measures and technical
changes to regulations.
● This is a frequent criticism of PMB’s - instead of empowering backbenchers to represent
key issues the government fails to address, they often serve as a means for the
government whips to exert undue influence over backbenchers.
○ Furthermore, typically only PMB’s which have government support will pass,
reducing backbenchers power to affect true legislative change.
The Passage Of the Terminally Ill Adults (End of Life) Bill As An Example Of Representative
Democracy and Private Member’s Bills:
● On Friday the 24th of November, the House of Commons passed the Terminally Ill Adults
(End of Life) Bill 2024 through its 2nd reading. The bill passed with a majority of 55, and
was introduced by Labour MP Kim Leadbeater as a Private Members Bill, after she came
top of the PMB ballot.
○ This bill legalised assisted dying for terminally ill adults in England and Wales, and
is one of the most significant social reforms in a generation.
● This highlights Parliament's legislative function, as backbenchers are able to propose and
make significant changes to law via the PMB process. If an MP comes first in the ballot,
their bill is debated first on sitting Fridays and they are most likely to advance legislation.
● This also highlights Parliament's representative function. The vote was a "free vote"
meaning MPs were allowed to vote with their conscience rather than along party lines.
Despite polling showing 2/3rds of the public supported assisted dying, the vote was much
closer.
○ This shows how MPs fulfil the trustee model of representation and exercise their
own judgement, rather than being beholden to the public's views.
How A Bill Becomes A Law
What happens before a bill enters the House of Commons stages?
● Before bills are introduced they go through a consultation stage
○ This can start with a consultation (Green Paper), which then may be turned into a
firm proposal (White Paper), on which committees comment, before the bill is
eventually drafted.
In what order do bills go through the Commons, Lords and Crown?
● If a bill starts in the Commons it goes through the Commons first, then the Lords, then back
to the Commons to approve the Lords' amendments and then to royal assent providing the
amendments are accepted.
● It is the same if the bill starts in the Lords, but the Lords and Commons are switched.
● The vast majority go through the House of Commons first.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 4
What stages does a bill go through in the Commons before it goes to the Lords?
1. First Reading - The bill is formally introduced to the House of Commons by a minister, a
date is set for the second reading and the bill is printed up ready for the second reading.
2. Second Reading - A minister outlines, explains and justifies the proposals and deals with
general questions, the principles of the bill are discussed and contested by backbenchers
and shadow ministers.
a. If the bill is contested at this stage there is a vote, though the government almost
always wins.
3. Committee Stage - The bill is sent to a Public Bill Committee, a separate one of which is
formed for each bill. The bill is scrutinised in detail and amended.
a. Public Bill Committees range in size from 16-50 MPs and reflect the party
composition of the House.
i. This means that amendments at this stage are dominated by the
government. Over 99% of ministerial amendments succeed at this stage,
whilst less than 1% of non government amendments do.
b. For especially important bills, especially finance bills, this scrutiny is done by the
whole of the House of Commons. For example the Illegal Migration Bill.
4. Report Stage - MPs can propose and vote on amendments on the floor of the house. The
amendments suggested at committee stage are also voted on.
5. Third Reading - There are no major amendments at this stage. The bill as a whole is looked
at and debated, before being passed or rejected.
What stages does a bill go through in the Lords after passing through the
Commons?
1. First Reading - The bill is introduced, a date is set for the second reading and the bill is
printed up ready for the second reading.
2. Second Reading - A minister outlines the proposals and deals with general questions, the
principles of the bill are discussed.
3. Committee Stage - In the Lords this is normally done in the chamber as a committee of the
whole house. The bill is scrutinised in detail and amended.
4. Report Stage - Peers can propose and vote on amendments on the floor of the house.
5. Third Reading - If the bill is passed it moves towards the Royal Assent. If it is rejected or
significantly amended then it returns to the Commons for consideration, going through all of
the Commons stages again before returning to the Lords.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 5
The Interaction Between The Commons and The Lords During The
Legislative Process
What Is The Key Role Of The House Of Lords In The Legislative Process
● The House of Lords recognises its lack of democratic legitimacy and therefore doesn’t seek
to exert all of the powers it could in the legislative process.
○ Instead, it sees its role as offering technical amendments to improve and fix bills, as
well as taking a stand against a bill when it feels it is justified, for example in terms
of protecting rights or halting a bill that has garnered a huge public backlash and
has limited public support.
● If the House of Lords offers amendments which are then rejected by the House of
Commons, the House of Lords often accepts its lack of democratic legitimacy and backs
down.
○ For example, the EU Withdrawal Agreement Act 2020 was sent back to the House
of Commons with five amendments, including one guaranteeing the continuance of
the ERASMUS scheme, however the House of Commons rejected all of these
amendments and the Lords backed down, recognising the democratic legitimacy of
the House of Commons and Brexit.
🏓 What Is Parliamentary Ping Pong? 🏓
● If either House makes amendments to a bill, the other House must consider them and
agree to them before a bill is passed.
○ If they fail to agree to them and make alternative proposals, then it must go back to
the other House to be voted on again.
● Bills can go back and forth between the House of Lords and House of Commons before
both Houses reach agreement on the working of the bill.
○ This is known as ‘Parliamentary Ping Pong’.
● A good recent example of this is over the 2021 Trade Act, which established the Trade
Remedies Authority.
○ The House of Lords sought to introduce an amendment, supported by some in the
Commons, to prevent UK governments from agreeing to trade deals with countries
that had committed genocide, which the courts would decide.
○ The Bill was introduced in the Commons in March 2020 and the Lords in July 2020.
After this, it went back and forth between the two houses 6 times before receiving
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 6
royal assent on 29 April 2021. The House of Lords eventually backed down on its
amendment.
The Safety of Rwanda (Asylum and Immigration) Act’s Passage Through The Commons and
Lords:
● The Safety of Rwanda Bill was first introduced to Parliament as emergency legislation on 7
December 2023.
○ It passed its second reading on 12 December and after being considered by the
committee of the whole house, the third reading on 17 January 2024, with just 11
Conservative MPs voting against, including Braverman and Jenrick, who supported
‘toughening up’ the act.
○ The committee of the whole house leads to less detailed scrutiny than public bill
committees, which are more focused and can call witnesses. The decision to have a
committee of the whol house meant that this stage lasted just 2 days, enabling it to
pass quicker.
● The bill then went to the Lords, where it passed the committee and report stage, before
being back to the Commons with a number of amendments.
○ The House of Commons voted down all of the Lords amendments, which initiated
parliamentary ping pong, where it went back and forth between the houses six times
before the Lords eventually backed down and it was passed on 22 April 2024,
recognising its lack of democratic legitimacy and therefore not wanting to block a
key government policy.
○ The proposed Lords amendments included ensuring that the bill adhered to
international law and that judical review should be available to those who wanted to
challenge their deportation.
● This shows how there can be parliamentary ping pong on key pieces of legislation, but that
the Lords often backs down against a determined government and Parliament, recognising
its lack of legitimacy.
○ Importantly, it also shows that the Lords doesn’t always use its power to delay
legislation for a year, even if it disagrees with the bill.
○ As the bill was introduced late on in the Parliament, there wouldn’t have been time
for the Parliaments Act to be triggered to force through the bill after a year, as there
would’ve been a general election by that time. Therefore, the Lords could’ve held
out and blocked the bill if they wanted to.
How Does The Salisbury Convention Limit The House Of Lords?
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 7
● The Salisbury Convention means that the House of Lords shouldn’t block any bill that fulfils
a pledge in the government’s election manifesto by voting against it in the second or third
reading.
○ The Lords can offer technical amendments but cannot introduce ‘wrecking
amendments’ which change the Government’s manifesto intention as proposed in
the bill.
○ The Lords must also give the Commons reasonable time to consider amendments
and pass a bill.
● There is disagreement within Lords as to whether the Convention should still apply during
Coalitions and minority governments.
○ It has largely been left up to individual peers to decide, though it caused fewer
problems as may be expected as the Lords rarely blocks government proposals
anyway.
The House Of Lords (Hereditary Peers) Bill As An Example of The Salisbury Convention:
● The House Of Lords (Hereditary Peers) Bill 2024 was introduced at First Reading on the
5th of September 2024.
○ The bill would remove the 92 hereditary peers in the upper chamber, and would fulfil
a Labour Manifesto commitment.
○ This reflects the Government's mission to modernise the upper chamber and
democratise the Constitution.
○ Currently, 92 hereditary peers sit in the House Of Lords. There is no other
comparable Western Democracy which allows members to vote on laws and have a
guaranteed seat in the Legislature by virtue of birth.
● The Bill is likely to pass in 2025 and due to the Salisbury Convention, the Lords authority to
block the bill is limited.
● The Salisbury Convention means that the House of Lords, as an unelected chamber, defers
to the House of Commons elected mandate and does not block government bills which fulfil
specific manifesto commitments.
○ This demonstrates a key power of the House of Commons relative to the House of
Lords - the Lords is restricted in its ability to block the will of the commons,
dominated by the government.
● This makes the chamber more Democratically representative - Hereditary Peers make up
only 0.001% of the UK’s population however represent 11.15% of the legislature (they are
10,000x more represented than any other individual). Additionally only 2 of the 92
Hereditary Peers are Labour.
● This also increases social representation of the Lords - 100% of the 92 Hereditary Peers
are male.
○ This shows how currently, Parliament fails at its key function of representing the
electorate.
How Do The Parliament Acts of 1911 and 1949 Limit The House Of Lords?
● The 1911 Parliament Acts was passed following a crisis over the budget. It had been
convention that the Lords didn't interfere with matters of taxation since the 17th century,
however they did in 1909 when the Liberal government tried to introduce new taxes on land
and wealth, causing a constitutional crisis.
○ The Act gave the House of Lords no right to delay financial bills and its previous
power to veto non-financial bills was replaced by a power of delay lasting 2 years.
● The 1949 Parliament Act was passed after the Lords opposed the Iron and Steel
nationalisation bill included in Attlee's Labour manifesto.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 8
○ The delaying power of the House of Lords was halved from 2 years to 1 year.
Secondary Legislation
● Bills, which turn into Acts of Parliament, are known as Primary Legislation.
○ These Acts empower ministers to make further changes/regulations within the
scope of the law after it has become law.
● These regulations are known as secondary/delegated legislation and can be changed by
ministers using ‘statutory instruments’, around 3,500 of which are introduced a year across
all areas of government legislation.
○ For example, statutory instruments are used to ban new substances by adding them
to a list under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.
○ In 2016, the government abolished maintenance grants for university students using
secondary legislation.
● Statutory Instruments are scrutinised by the Select Committee On Statutory Instruments,
which considers whether they should be drawn to special attention of the House.
○ The majority of statutory instruments are made law by ministers and automatically
become laws unless objected to by Parliament, which is very rare.
Early Prisoners Release as an Example of Secondary Legislation:
● On the 12th of July 2024, the new Labour government approved a Statutory Instrument (a
form of secondary legislation) to deal with the prisons crisis by allowing the early release of
prisoners.
○ This meant prisoners could be released after serving 40% of their term, rather than
the previous 50%, allowing 1000's of prisoners to be released in order to tackle
overcrowding.
● The Statutory instrument was introduced by Justice Minister Shabana Mahmood, and was
debated for 90 minutes in the commons.
○ The use of secondary legislation, which does not require a full vote in Parliament, to
implement significant and controversial policy change has prompted debate over
whether there was a lack of effective scrutiny in Parliament.
● This shows how Secondary Legislation is a key power of the executive, and allows them to
have significant control over legislation and policy.
Statutory Instrument Introducing Mandatory Gambling Levy and Stake Limits
● On 27 November 2024, the government introduced a mandatory levy on bookmakers and
casinos, alongside caps on online slot machine stakes, to address problem gambling and
fund NHS services.
○ The new levy is expected to generate £100 million annually, which will be allocated
to research, prevention, and treatment of gambling-related harms.
● This change was implemented through a statutory instrument under the Gambling Act
2005, which grants the Secretary of State for Culture, Media, and Sport (DCMS) the power
to regulate gambling operators and introduce financial obligations on the industry.
○ The statutory instrument, titled the Gambling (Levy and Stake Limits) Order 2024,
allows the government to amend regulations without the need for a full Act of
Parliament.
● A statutory instrument is a form of secondary legislation, meaning it does not require a full
vote in Parliament and can be passed through either an “affirmative” or “negative”
procedure.
○ In this case, the government used the affirmative procedure, requiring approval from
both Houses but without the extensive debate or scrutiny of primary legislation.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 9
● This demonstrates the government’s ability to implement significant policy changes through
secondary legislation, enabling swift action on pressing issues like gambling regulation
without lengthy parliamentary processes.
How The House Of Commons’ Legislative Scrutiny Has Decreased
● MPs today spend a lot less time in the House of Commons debating legislation than they
used to.
○ MPs spent just 24% of their time in the chamber between 2006 and 2021, compared
to 44% for Peers.
○ Parliament can therefore be seen as relying on the House of Lords for scrutiny.
● Just 27% of bills in the last five parliamentary sessions were subject to an oral evidence
session at the committee stage, in which the committee calls in expert witnesses to give
their views on the legislation.
● Only around 10% of government bills passed by parliament receive pre-legislative scrutiny
(when they’re Green/White Papers).
● Especially in recent years, many bills are rushed through Parliament and receive little
scrutiny from the House of Commons, as the Brexit Process and COVID-19 set precedents
for legislating quickly and avoiding scrutiny.
○ The Conservative government gave the Illegal Migration Bill just 2 days in the
Committee of the Whole House.
○ This compares to the 2016 Immigration Act, which had 15 committee sessions and
received 55 written pieces of evidence.
The Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Act As An Example Of Poor Scrutiny:
● The Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Act was one of the Labour
Government’s first legislative proposals introduced after the 2024 election.The act brinsg
the franchised passenger rail services into public ownership when existing contracts end.
This fulfils Labour's Manifesto promise to create “Great British Railways”.
○ However, the legislative process for the act was criticised for being rushed and
failing to allow MPs time for effective scrutiny.
● The Bill was first introduced prior to the Parliamentary Recess, and received its Committee
Stage and Third reading both on the 3rd of September.
○ The Bill was scrutinised as a Committee of the Whole House, bypassing the
line-by-line scrutiny provided by a Public Bill Committee.
● As there were no amendments accepted, the Report Stage did not occur. The Legislative
Process has been criticised for having limited scrutiny, providing no costings, and providing
no evidence it would improve services.
○ This highlights how the Government's power to control the Parliamentary timetable
allows them to rush bills through the commons and evade scrutiny. This gives
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 10
backbench and opposition MPs less time to table amendments, have meaningful
debate and challenge the government on specific provisions of the Bill.
The Comparative Powers Of The House Of Commons And
House Of Lords
The Exclusive Powers Of The House Of Commons
Bringing Down A Government
● One key power held exclusively by the House of Commons is that they can hold a vote of
no confidence and therefore bring down a government if the government loses, as they are
forced to resign.
○ The last time this happened was in 1979, when nationalist parties that were
upholding a minority Labour government in a confidence and supply agreement
withdrew their support, which brought down the Callaghan government and
triggered the 1979 general election.
Forming A Confidence And Supply Agreement
● The House of Commons also has the exclusive power to uphold a minority government
through a confidence and supply agreement.
○ This is when one of the Conservatives/Labour doesn’t have a majority and doesn’t
get a majority through a formal coalition (such as in 2010), but instead through a
limited agreement with another party/parties that agree to keep them in government.
○ The supporting smaller party promises to support the government in a vote of no
confidence and to vote through the government’s budget (supply). In return they
receive concessions.
● In 2017, for example, the Conservative Minority Government used a confidence and supply
agreement with the DUP (Democratic Unionist Party), in which the DUP agreed to support
the Conservatives in votes of confidence and over budgets, in return for £1 billion of money
pledged to Northern Ireland.
Forcing Through Legislation
● If the House of Lords refuses to change its position and pass a bill supported by the House
of Commons, the House of Commons can as a last resort invoke the Parliament Act 1949
after a year to force a bill through.
○ This was used 3 times by the Blair government but hasn’t been used since and has
only been used 7 times in total. Under Blair, it was used to:
■ Changing the voting system for EU parliament elections, with the European
Parliamentary Elections Act 1999.
■ Equalising the age of consent to 16 for homosexuals and heterosexuals,
with the Sexual Offences Act 2000
■ Banning hunting with dogs, with the Hunting Act 2004.
Passing Financial/Manifesto Legislation
● The Salisbury Convention means that the House of Lords shouldn’t block any bill that fulfils
a pledge in the government’s election manifesto by voting against it in the second or third
reading.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 11
○ The Lords can offer technical amendments but cannot introduce ‘wrecking
amendments’ which change the Government’s manifesto intention as proposed in
the bill.
○ The Lords must also give the Commons reasonable time to consider amendments
and pass a bill.
● The Parliament Acts of 1911 and 1949 prevent the House of Lords from delaying financial
bills.
The Main Powers Of The House Of Lords
Forcing A General Election After 5 Years
● If the government seeks to stay on beyond 5 years without a general election, then the
House of Lords has the legal power to force a general election. This is included in the 1911
Parliament Act
Scrutinising And Revising Legislation
● Especially in recent years, when the government has increasingly rushed legislation
through the House of Commons, the House of Lords has played a crucial role in
scrutinising and revising legislation, as the government has less control over the
Parliamentary timetable in the Lords.
○ The House of Lords frequently offers technical amendments to improve and fix bills
and is sometimes called an ‘amending chamber’.
■ The government and House of Commons accept most of these
amendments.
The Product Regulation And Meteorology Bill As An Example Of House Of Lords Select
Committees:
● The Product Regulation And Meteorology Bill was introduced in early 2025 as part of the
Labour Government’s "reset" with the EU. This bill contains huge delegated powers giving
UK ministers the power to unilaterally align the UK with EU regulations, including through
statutory instrument rather than primary legislation
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 12
○ That means MPs will have little ability to scrutinise or suggest amendments to the
EU legislation being copied over, despite being potentially controversial and having
wide ranging implications.
● This has drawn significant criticism from the House of Lords Delegated Powers Committee
and the House of Lords Constitution Committee for its lack of policy detail and the breadth
of delegated powers it would allow - highlighting executive dominance over legislation,
including through secondary legislation.
○ The committee took oral and written evidence from stakeholders as well as
questioning senior officials from the Department for Business and Trade. After this,
they highlighted 6 clauses of the bill which would inappropriately shift legislative
power from Parliament to the executive.
● Following this, the Government made several concessions in the Lords including
amendments to introduce consultation requirements before ministers make any regulations,
and greater use of the affirmative procedure to approve statutory instruments meaning
there would be a debate and a vote in both houses.
○ This shows how Lords Select Committees can have a direct influence over
legislation and force concessions from the government, limiting executive
dominance in Parliament, as the work of select committees is evidence based and
scrutiny is professional.
○ It also shows how the House of Lords does the bulk of legislative scrutiny, as MPs
have many other priorities and the government has a majority in the House of
Commons and often encourages its MPs not to make amendments to bills.
Delaying Non-Financial Legislation
● Though the House of Lords often backs down if its amendments are rejected by the House
of Commons, recognising its lack of democratic legitimacy, it sometimes doesn’t and takes
a stand against a bill when it feels it is justified.
○ This is often to protect human rights or in relation to a bill that has garnered a
significant public backlash/has limited public support.
● This delaying power can be very significant in influencing legislation, especially in
emergencies when governments want to pass laws quickly.
○ For example, in 2001 ten defeats in the House Lords led the government to remove
incitement to religious hatred as an offence from its anti-terrorism legislation.
■ The House of Lords argued it would’ve threatened rights.
⬆ The Growing Power And Assertiveness Of The House Of Lords ⬆
How The House Of Lords Has Become More Representative
● Following New Labour’s reforms, the House of Lords is no longer dominated by hereditary
peers, instead it is dominated by life peers who are there primarily as a result of their
expertise and experience.
○ It is also becoming increasingly socially representative as efforts have been made to
appoint more women and ethnic minority peers. Of the 63 appointments made
between 2000 and 2014, 13 were from a minority ethnic background.
● Following New Labour’s reforms, the House of Lords also no longer has an in-built
Conservative majority, with the crossbenchers ensuring no single party can get a majority.
This leads to greater scrutiny than in the House of Commons.
○ In March 2025, there are 273 Conservative members, 187 Labour members, 184
Crossbenchers, and 78 Liberal Democrats out of a total of over 800 members in the
House of Lords.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 13
How The House Of Lords Has Become More Professional
● Since New Labour’s reforms, the House of Lords has become a lot more professional.
○ Many life peers are ex professional politicians who are able to provide leadership in
the House of Lords and have experience in parliamentary scrutiny.
■ Lord Andrew Adonis, for example, is a Labour peer who served as Secretary
of State for transport under Gordon Brown.
○ Many life peers are specialists from different fields, who can provide expertise on
specific areas.
■ Lord Mair, for example, is a geotechnical engineer and Professor of Civil
Engineering at the University of Cambridge and he is able to bring this
expertise to his role as chair of the House of Lords Science and Technology
Committee.
■ Lord Sugar was appointed to the House of Lords for his experience in
business.
● After the passing of the Human Rights Act in 1998, civil liberties has become a more
significant part of UK politics.
○ As the Lords has many lawyers and human rights experts, it has seen itself as the
guardian of civil liberties, shown in their 2008 opposition to Labour's anti-terrorism
legislation.
James Timpson As An Example Of The House of Lords’ Expertise:
● James Timpson’s appointment to the House of Lords and role as Minister of State for
Prisons shows how the Lords, particularly through life peers, can bring specialist expertise
into government and parliament.
○ As CEO of the Timpson Group, he pioneered a progressive employment model,
hiring ex-offenders to help them reintegrate into society. His first-hand experience in
reducing reoffending through employment and rehabilitation provides the
government with significant expertise.
● This shows how the House of Lords allows experts from specific fields—including business,
law, and social justice—to contribute directly to policymaking and scrutiny of legislation.
○ Timpson’s appointment as a minister further demonstrates how the Lords can
provide government ministers who do not necessarily have parliamentary
experience, but bring deep sectoral knowledge to their roles.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 14
○ His selection supports the argument that while the Lords is unelected, its ability to
draw on expertise from outside politics adds value to both legislation and
government decision-making.
How The House Of Lords Has Become More Independent Of The Executive And
Effective At Scrutiny
● Especially since New Labour’s reform, the House of Lords has become more independent
of the executive and more assertive in scrutinising the work of the government.
○ As peers aren't elected, they don't need the party machine or party funding to
remain in post, therefore there is less pressure to vote along party lines, as whips
have little bargaining power.
○ This leads to governments being defeated a great deal more in the House of Lords
than they are in the House of Commons, especially when the government has a
massive majority, in which case the Lords becomes the effective opposition.
■ Tony Blair was defeated just 4 times in the House of Commons, all of which
were in his last term, but was defeated 353 times in the House of Lords.
■ Since the 2019 election, Boris Johnson was defeated just 4 times in the
House of Commons but 243 times in the House of Lords, which was an
unprecedentedly large number given the short amount of time he was in
power.
● The House of Lords also has more time, energy and expertise to devote to scrutinising
government policy and legislation line by line.
○ The Illegal Migration Act 2023 spent 2 days at committee stage in the House of
Commons, but spent 21 days at committee stage in the House of Lords.
○ Despite former Home Secretary Suella Braverman trying to assert the Salisbury
Convention, the Lords defeated the bill 20 times.
󰎾 The 2018 EU Withdrawal Bill 󰎾
● The 2018 EU Withdrawal Bill introduced by Theresa May is a good example of how the
House of Lords can be effective in challenging legislation when the government is weak
and some members of the House of Commons support the amendments.
○ In June 2018, the May government suffered 15 defeats in the Lords in connection to
the EU Withdrawal Bill, with one amendment seeking to prevent Britain leaving the
Customs Union and another ensuring parliament would have a meaningful vote on
any Withdrawal Agreement reached with the EU.
■ 6 were defeated in the Commons.
■ 1 was accepted by the government (making sure that under law the UK
would be able to copy new EU laws passed after the UK's exit and to
participate in EU agencies if it chooses).
■ The other 8 saw some form of compromise, conceding that a meaningful
vote would have to be held and there would be no hard border on the island
of Ireland.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 15
🗣 The Debate Over The Relative Power Of The Two Houses 🗣
Power Over Legislation
Arguments That The House Of Commons Is More Powerful:
● If the House of Lords refuses to change its position and pass a bill supported by the House
of Commons, the House of Commons can as a last resort invoke the Parliament Act 1949
after a year to force a bill through.
● The House of Lords is limited in the legislation it can vote down and play a role in, whilst the
House of Commons isn’t.
○ The Salisbury Convention means that the House of Lords shouldn’t block any bill
that fulfils a pledge in the government’s election manifesto by voting against it in the
second or third reading.
■ The Lords can offer technical amendments but cannot introduce ‘wrecking
amendments’ which change the Government’s manifesto intention as
proposed in the bill.
■ The Lords must also give the Commons reasonable time to consider
amendments and pass a bill.
○ The Parliament Acts of 1911 and 1949 prevent the House of Lords from delaying
financial bills.
● Even when the House of Lords votes against legislation/attempts to significantly amend it, it
often backs down when the House of Commons disagrees again/votes against these
amendments, recognising its lack of democratic legitimacy.
○ This occurred with the Safety of Rwanda Act in April 2024.
Arguments That The House Of Lords Is More Powerful:
● Though the House of Lords often backs down if its amendments are rejected by the House
of Commons, recognising its lack of democratic legitimacy, it sometimes doesn’t and takes
a stand against a bill when it feels it is justified.
○ This is often to protect human rights or in relation to a bill that has garnered a
significant public backlash/has limited public support.
● This delaying power can be very significant in influencing legislation, especially in
emergencies when governments want to pass laws quickly.
● When the government has a large majority in the House of Commons, it is very unlikely to
be defeated. By contrast, especially since New Labour’s reform, the House of Lords has
become more independent of the executive and more assertive in scrutinising the work of
the government.
○ This leads to governments being defeated a great deal more in the House of Lords
than they are in the House of Commons, especially when the government has a
massive majority, in which case the Lords becomes the effective opposition.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 16
Scrutiny Of The Government
Arguments That The House Of Lords Is More Powerful:
● Especially in recent years, when the government has increasingly rushed legislation
through the House of Commons, the House of Lords has played a crucial role in
scrutinising and revising legislation, as the government has less control over the
Parliamentary timetable in the Lords.
○ The House of Lords frequently offers technical amendments to improve and fix bills
and is sometimes called an ‘amending chamber’.
■ The government and House of Commons accept most of these
amendments.
● Since New Labour’s reforms, the House of Lords has also become a lot more professional
and has significant expertise, which allows highly effective scrutiny of government
legislation.
○ The House of Lords also has more time, energy and expertise to devote to
scrutinising government policy and legislation line by line.
○ The Agriculture Act 2020 received 32 hours of scrutiny in the House of Commons
and 96 hours of scrutiny in the House of Lords.
● The House of Commons spends little time scrutinising government legislation, whilst the
fact that MPs are whipped and public bill committees reflect the balance of the house, and
therefore have a government majority, limit the effectiveness of House of Commons
scrutiny.
Arguments That The House Of Commons Is More Powerful:
● The House of Commons can also be seen as providing effective non-legislative scrutiny in
a number of ways, including select committees, ministers’ questions and debates.
● The democratic legitimacy of the House of Commons’ legislative scrutiny leads to it being
more effective, whilst it also has the exclusive power to vote down financial legislation and
legislation included in the government’s manifesto.
● Public Bill Committees in the House of Commons do provide effective scrutiny.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 17
Debates and Key Non-Legislative Powers Of Both Chambers
Arguments That The House Of Commons Is More Powerful:
● A key power held exclusively by the House of Commons is that they can hold a vote of no
confidence and therefore bring down a government if the government loses.
● The House of Commons also has the exclusive power to uphold a minority government
through a confidence and supply agreement.
● The House of Commons can also exert influence through debates, which put issues on the
political agenda and put pressure on the government to address them.
○ There are a number of different types of debates, including emergency debates and
debates suggested by the Backbench Business Committee, which chooses the
topic of debate for 35 days in each parliamentary session.
Arguments That The House Of Lords Is More Powerful:
● The House of Lords can also play a key role in raising the importance of issues through
debates. These debates are often insightful and considered due to the significant expertise
within the chamber.
○ They can have influence by considering issues that are not focused on by the
House of Commons due to the greater time that the House of Lords has. This can
help to put them on the political agenda.
■ For example, on January 18 2024, the House of Lords held a number of key
debates on important issues including climate change, refugee integration,
religious education in schools, the adoption of new vaccines, and creating
parity between health and social care to address dementia.
■ This format of short debates allows the Lords to cover a range of important
topics, leveraging their expertise to bring attention to and influence public
policy on these issues.
● The House of Lords also has the legal power to force a general election if the government
tries to stay on beyond 5 years. This is given to it in the Parliament Act 1911.
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A
Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 18
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 19
