https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover
UK Government
2 Parliament
● 2.1 The structure and role of the House of Commons and House of Lords.
○ The selection of members of the House of Commons and House of Lords,
including the different types of Peers.
○ The main functions of the House of Commons and House of Lords and the
extent to which these functions are fulfilled.
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓
🗣 Key Debates 🗣
● The most important debates on this topic relate to how effective Parliament is at carrying
out its key functions.
○ Some of the questions that involve this part of the Parliament topic require
knowledge from other parts of the Parliament topic and course to answer, whilst you
also need to know the content in this topic to effectively answer most questions on
other parts of the Parliament topic, or questions that encompass the whole of the
Parliament topic.
❓Past/Possible Essay Questions❓
● Evaluate the view that Parliament performs its functions effectively. (30)
● Evaluate the view that Parliament is representative of the electorate. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the House of Commons carries out its functions effectively. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the House of Lords carries out its functions effectively. (30)
● Evaluate the view that reforms since 1997 have made Parliament a more democratic
institution. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the House of Lords requires reform. (30)
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 1
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover 1
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓ 1
🏛 An Introduction To Parliament 🏛 2
What Does Parliament Consist Of? 2
The Four Main Functions Of Parliament 2
The Selection Of Members Of The House Of Commons and House Of Lords 3
The Selection Of Members Of The House Of Commons 3
The Selection Of Members Of The House Of Lords 3
The Main Functions Of Parliament and the Extent To Which They’re Fulfilled 6
📜 Passing Legislation 📜 6
Scrutinising The Executive 9
Providing Ministers 10
Representing The Electorate 10
🏛 An Introduction To Parliament 🏛
What Does Parliament Consist Of?
● Parliament consists of the House of Commons and the House of Lords.
○ The House of Commons is the more elected and powerful chamber, whilst the
House of Lords is unelected and less powerful.
● The UK has a ‘parliamentary government’, with the legislative and executive branches
fused.
○ All of the government ministers come from parliament.
○ A party is able to form a government when they have a majority in the House of
Commons.
○ Parliament must approve all government legislation.
○ Parliament holds the government to account.
● This is different from a presidential government, which is based on the separation of the
legislature and the executive’s powers.
The Four Main Functions Of Parliament
● To pass legislation.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 2
● To scrutinise the executive.
● To provide ministers to the government.
● To represent the electorate.
The Selection Of Members Of The House Of Commons and
House Of Lords
The Selection Of Members Of The House Of Commons
● Each of the 650 Members of Parliament in the House of Commons is elected by and
represents a constituency.
○ They are elected by the First-Past-The-Post voting system in constituencies of
around 75,000 members, though there is significant variation in some
constituencies.
■ The Isle of Wight, for example, has two constituencies each with a
population of under 57,000.
● The vast majority of MPs belong to political parties and are selected as candidates by their
local constituency branch.
○ Sometimes, the central party ‘parachutes’ a candidate they particularly want to get
elected into a constituency, even if they don’t have links to the local area.
○ For example, former leader of think tank Resolution Foundation Torsten Bell was
chosen to be the candidate for Swansea West despite not being Welsh.
The Selection Of Members Of The House Of Lords
● There is no fixed number of Members of the House of Lords. None of these members are
elected and the vast majority are appointed.
○ There are currently 776 members, but in the past there have been over 800
members.
● Members of the House of Lords may belong to a political party, or may be ‘crossbenchers’
who don’t belong to any political party.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 3
○ In March 2025, there are 273 Conservative members, 187 Labour members, 184
Crossbenchers, and 78 Liberal Democrats out of a total of over 800 members in the
House of Lords.
● There are 3 different types of members: Lords Spiritual, hereditary peers and appointed Life
Peers.
Lords Spiritual
● There are 26 ‘Lords Spiritual’, who are all bishops from the Church of England.
Hereditary Peers
● Prior to the 1999 House of Lords Act, all of the peers in the House of Lords were ‘hereditary
peers’ who were there due to belonging to noble/aristocratic families.
○ The 1999 House of Lords Act removed all but 92 of these hereditary peers.
○ When a peer dies, they are replaced by a vote using the Alternative Vote System
(AV) among the hereditary peers whose party they belong to.
Appointed Life Peers
How Life Peers Are Appointed:
● Since the 1999 House of Lords Act, the vast majority of members of the House of Lords
have been appointed ‘Life Peers’, who are appointed for their lifetime without their peerage
passing on to their children.
● There are a number of different ways Life Peers are appointed to the House of Lords, all of
which are overseen by the House of Lords Appointments Commission, which advises the
Prime Minister on the appropriateness of appointments.
○ Some are non-political and are nominated by the House of Lords Appointment
Commission due to their expertise. These appointments are designed to ensure a
greater diversity of backgrounds, skills, and experiences in the Lords.
○ Other appointments are political and are nominated by the government, including:
■ Direct ministerial appointments, which is when the government appoints
somebody to the Lords so that they can serve as a minister.
■ Dissolution honours, which is when at the end of a Parliament before a
general election, parties nominate MPs who are leaving the Commons to the
Lords.
■ Resignation honours, which is when appointments are made by a Prime
Minister when they step down from office. This is often used to reward aides
and colleagues.
Concerns Over The Appointment Of Life Peers:
● There is particular concern over the political appointments made to the House of Lords,
with Prime Ministers often using them to appoint those they are close to and those who
have donated to their party, which has led to concerns over corruption.
○ When leader of the opposition, Keir Starmer has criticised recent Tory governments
for undermining trust in politics by handing peerages to ‘lackeys and donors’, such
as Boris Johnson’s friend and Evening Standard owner Evgeny Lebedev and
billionaire Conservative Party donor David Harding.
● In 2006-07, there was a ‘cash for peerages’ scandal concerning a possible link between
individuals who had loaned significant amounts to the the Labour Party and these
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 4
individuals being nominated by Prime Minister Tony Blair for life peerages in the House of
Lords
○ The nominations were rejected by the House of Lords Appointment Commission
and there was suspicion peerages were promised in return for the loans.
○ It ultimately couldn't be proven this had been agreed in advance, though.
● Billionaire Conservative Donor Lord Cruddas was made a peer in the House of Lords in
February 2021. Just days after, he donated £500,000 to the Conservative Party, the largest
amount he’s ever donated.
○ He was made a peer by Boris Johnson despite the fact that he failed the
Appointments Commission vetting process, which Johnson overruled.
Boris Johnson’s Resignation Honours:
● Boris Johnson’s resignation honours, announced in June 2023, led to controversy due to
accusations that they rewarded personal loyalty over public service.
○ Conservative Mayor Ben Houchen was given a peerage, as was London Assembly
member Shaun Bailey.
○ Political allies Priti Patel and Jacob-Rees Mogg were also included, with the former
becoming a dame and the latter being knighted.
● Peerages were given out to 3 of Johnson’s special advisers; Ben Gascoing, Ross Kempsell
and particularly controverailly, 29 year old Charlotte Owen.
○ Owen is the youngest person in history to be given a peerage and had worked as a
special adviser for just over a year.
● It has been confirmed that eight people that Johnson had wanted to place in the second
chamber were rejected by the House of Lords Appointments Commission.
Peerages Announced In December 2024 By The Labour Government
● In December 2024, over 1 week Labour made 30 nominations for peerages, including
former chief of staff Sue Grey, to redress the "imbalance" in the chamber, as the
Conservatives significantly increased the Conservative Party membership during their rule.
● The PM rewarded former MPs such as Thangam Debbonaire, close aides such as Anji
Hunter and trade unionists such as Brendan Barber.
● These were Labour loyalists and allies, which highlights the limitations of the current
process for selecting peers, as governments are incentivised to award peerages based on
political favouritism rather than experience and they are able to appoint significant numbers
of peers.
○ There is particular concern as PM's use their powers to appoint those they are close
to, leading to the potential for corruption.
○ On the other hand, it can be argued that governments being able to nominate peers
is a strength of the process of selecting the House of Lords, as it means that
politicians with political and legislative experience are in the second chamber.
Lord Sugar Has Now Attended Less Than 2% Of Votes:
● Since joining the House of Lords in 2009, Lord Sugar has attended less than 2% of votes.
● This shows that even if some life peers may have significant experience, they don’t actively
engage in voting/scrutiny of government legislation and therefore don’t improve democracy.
The House of Lords (Hereditary Peers) Bill:
● Labour’s 2024 manifesto set out an ambitious plan to reform the House of Lords, including
the complete abolition of hereditary peers, the introduction of a mandatory retirement age of
80, and a public consultation on replacing the Lords with a more representative and/or
elected second chamber.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 5
● Since taking office, the Labour government hasn’t yet introduced any legislation on the
mandatory retirement age and hasn’t set up a public consultation, but it has introduced the
House of Lords (Hereditary Peers) Bill, which seeks to remove the remaining 92 hereditary
peers who retain their seats in the Lords.
○ Labour argues that this reform is necessary to modernise the Lords, making it more
accountable and professional, and to end what they describe as an “anachronism”
in British politics that gives the aristocracy a role in legislation.
● Conservative peers have been actively working to obstruct the bill’s passage by tabling
large numbers of amendments and arguing that removing hereditary peers would reduce
independent expertise in the Lords.
○ Despite these efforts, the bill is expected to pass due to the Salisbury Convention,
which dictates that the Lords should not block or unduly delay policies that were
explicitly included in the winning party’s election manifesto.
○ As Labour secured a large majority in the 2024 election with a clear pledge to
abolish hereditary peers, the Lords will ultimately be bound by constitutional
convention to allow the reform to go through, even if some peers continue to resist
its implementation.
The Main Functions Of Parliament and the Extent To Which
They’re Fulfilled
📜 Passing Legislation 📜
How Is Passing Legislation A Key Function Of Parliament?
● Perhaps Parliament’s most important function is to pass laws.
○ It is the supreme legislative body in the UK and has the authority to pass or amend
laws on any subject.
● For legislation to be passed, it needs to be voted for by both the House of Commons and
House of Lords, or just by the House of Commons if the Lords has failed to vote for it for
over a year, due to the 1911 and 1949 Parliament Acts.
How Does The Government Dominate The Legislative Process The House of
Commons?
● The government has control over most of the legislative process and initiates the vast
majority of bills.
○ As the government has a majority in the House of Commons, and often a large one,
Parliament very rarely defeats or significantly amends legislation, as doing so
requires a united opposition and a number of government rebels.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 6
● Whips, both government and opposition, are highly important to the passage of legislation
in the Commons, as they are responsible for ensuring MPs attend parliamentary votes and
for granting leave if their vote isn't essential.
○ They issue MPs with written instructions to attend (known as a 'whip'), indicating
how important attendance to the vote is by how many times it is underlined, with the
most important being underlined 3 times; the 'three line whip'.
○ Whips can offer potential ministerial posts as encouragement or impose sanctions
on those who stray from party policy.
■ If MPs are persistent rebels or damage their party’s reputation due to
personal misconduct, they can have the whip withdrawn and are therefore
no longer part of the parliamentary party.
Sunak Passed Key Pieces Of Legislation And Faced Few Defeats Despite Unpopularity:
● Sunak was defeated just once in the House of Commons as Prime Minister and was
successful in uniting the Conservative Party to pass important pieces of legislation,
including the Safety of Rwanda Act 2024, Strikes (Minimum Service Levels) Act 2023 and
Public Order Act 2023.
○ The Safety of Rwanda Act 2024 had only 11 abstensions and no rebellions due to
the 3 line whip. Whilst the Lords were highly opposed to the act, they conceded
after 4 rounds of “ping-pong” as they didn’t want to undermine the elected chamber.
● This is despite him being deeply unpopular as a Prime Minister and the Conservative Party
as a whole being way behind Labour in the polls during his premiership.
○ Only 20% of the public had a positive opinion of Sunak, according to a YouGov poll
in May 2024.
● This shows how Prime Ministers and governments are able to pass key pieces of legislation
and unite the party when they have a significant majority in Parliament, even if they are
deeply unpopular.
○ This being said, Sunak did hold a free vote on the Tobacco and Vapes Act in April
2024 to avoid having to try to whip members of the party in line, with a significant
segment of the party and cabinet being opposed on libertarian grounds.
○ 57 Conservative MPs including Minister Kemi Badenoch voted against on the
grounds of government overreach into individual freedom.
What Role Does The House Of Lords Play In Passing Legislation?
● The House of Lords also votes on legislation, but doesn’t have the same amount of power
as the House of Commons.
○ The Lords cannot interfere with money bills and can only amend non-financial
legislation with a 1-year delaying power, while the Commons has the exclusive
power to give consent to taxation and to pass legislation included in the
Government’s election manifesto.
● Whips in the House of Lords are weaker as they can’t use the power of patronage as an
incentive and members of the Lords don’t rely on being a member of a party to stay in
place, as they don’t need to get continually elected.
✅ In What Ways Is Parliament Effective In Passing Legislation ✅
● Due to its majority and the power of the whips, the government rarely has a problem
passing bills through the House of Commons and legislation is almost always passed
effectively.
○ The House of Lords does offer amendments but rarely halts the passage of
legislation, recognising its limited democratic legitimacy.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 7
■ Further, if the House of Lords does block legislation supported by the House
of Commons, then the Commons can use the Parliaments Acts to override
their veto after a year.
● The House of Lords especially is important in scrutinising legislation and offering technical
amendments to ensure laws are workable and effective.
● In emergencies, Parliament is also able to push through legislation in a short amount of
time.
○ The 2020 Coronavirus Act which gave the government wide ranging powers to
tackle the Coronavirus pandemic, including powers that significantly limited human
rights, was passed in just 6 days.
○ Similarly, on 12 April 2025, Parliament was recalled on a Saturday in order to pass
an emergency law giving Business Secretary Jonathon Reynolds the power to direct
British Steel to prevent a Scunthorpe plant from shutting down; the last blast furnace
in the UK.
■ The bill passed Parliament in just six-and-a-half hours, receiving royal
assent the same day.
● Some Private Members’ Bills are also passed if they get the support of the governing party,
such as the Assault On Emergency Workers Act 2018, which was introduced by Labour MP
Chris Bryant.
❌ In What Ways Is Parliament Ineffective In Passing Legislation ❌
● The vast majority of Private Members’ Bills aren’t passed, as if bills don’t receive
government support, it is very difficult to pass them through Parliament.
● Though the House of Lords only have a 1 year delaying power, this can be significant in
delaying important legislation/forcing the House of Commons to compromise and amend
legislation.
● Especially when the government has a small/no majority, rebellions can be disruptive in
preventing important legislation being passed.
○ Both Theresa May and Boris Johnson’s governments failed to pass their Brexit
Withdrawal Agreements a number of times in 2019 when their Conservative
governments relied on a Confidence and Supply Agreement with the Democratic
Unionist Party (DUP) for their majority.
● Legislation being rushed through Parliament can lead to a lack of scrutiny and to poorly
drafted and unworkable laws as a consequence.
○ For example, The 1991 Dangerous Dogs Act, passed in response to a series of
tabloid stories about dog attacks, prohibited certain breeds of dogs instead of
targeting irresponsible owners, as many critics argued it should have. A review by
the RSPCA much later showed that of the 30 deaths caused in that period by dogs,
21 involved breeds that were not specified in the act.
○ It is increasingly common for legislation to be rushed through the House of
Commons by the government.
■ The Illegal Migration Bill, for example, was given just 2 days to be
scrutinised by the House of Commons at the Committee stage before being
passed on to the House of Lords.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 8
Scrutinising The Executive
● For more detail on this, look at the ‘The ways in which Parliament interacts with the
Executive’ video on the Politics Explained YouTube Channel and the accompanying section
of the UK Government Updated Textbook on the Politics Explained website.
How Is Scrutinising The Executive A Key Function Of Parliament?
● The government comes from Parliament and is held to account by Parliament, which
scrutinises it in a number of ways.
The Key Ways Parliament Scrutinises The Executive
● Ministerial Questions, including Prime Minister’s Questions, allow Parliament to directly
question and scrutinise the government, both in the House of Commons and House of
Lords.
○ Though other Ministerial Questions can expose failures and scrutinise the
government effectively, PMQs is more theatre than effective scrutiny.
● The opposition holds the government to account by directly questioning ministers and
providing the public with alternative policies.
● Select Committees, both in the House of Commons and House of Lords, provide in depth
scrutiny of the government and make recommendations for change.
● A range of different types of debates in the House of Commons and House of Lords can
allow Parliament to challenge government policy, especially if topics are chosen by the
Backbench Business Committee in the Commons.
Cameron’s Appointment As Foreign Secretary And Parliamentary Scrutiny:
David Cameron’s appointment as foreign secretary in November 2023 broke convention and can
be seen as threatening democracy and the ability of the House of Commons to scrutinise the
government.
● The last time a foreign secretary served from the House of Lords was over 40 years ago.
Cameron’s appointment therefore broke with convention as he was unelected, especially as
he was made a peer by Sunak for the sole purpose of being able to serve in government.
● Cameron was not subject to scrutiny from elected MPs like normal ministers. As a member
of the House of Lords, he didn’t face regular questioning by MPs during the usual Foreign
Office questions sessions.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 9
○ Instead, his interactions with elected representatives were limited to appearances
before select committees, which are less frequent and typically less rigorous.
○ This being said, he did face scrutiny from members of the House of Lords, some of
whom have major foreign policy credentials. This includes Lord Robertson (former
Secretary-General of NATO), Baroness Ashton (the first EU High Representative for
Foreign Affairs) and Lord Stirrup (former Chief of the Defence Staff of the British
Armed Forces).
Providing Ministers
How Is Providing Ministers A Key Function Of Parliament?
● As the UK has a Parliamentary government, all ministers must come from Parliament.
○ The vast majority of these ministers are from the House of Commons and are
selected by the Prime Minister using their powers of patronage.
○ Though a minority, some ministers do come from the House of Lords too.
■ For example, James Timpson was made a peer in order to be made Prisons
Minister by Starmer after the 2024 election. He was brought in for his
expertise and strong reputation in relation to prison reform.
To What Extent Does Parliament Fulfil Its Role Of Providing Ministers?
● Overall, Parliament is effective in providing the government with ministers.
○ It must be noted that ministers often lack expertise in their department, however,
especially given the frequent turnover of ministers in cabinet reshuffles.
Representing The Electorate
How Is Representing The Public A Key Function Of Parliament?
● The UK is a democracy and Parliament is elected to represent and implement the views
and wishes of the population.
How Representative Is Parliament In Terms Of Being Democratic?
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 10
Ways In Which Parliament Is Representative:
● The House of Commons is democratically elected on a regular basis, with each MP
representing a relatively small number of voters.
○ This means that voters are able to hold their representatives to account and remove
them if they judge them to have not represented them effectively, by voting for a
different party/candidate.
○ After Conservative MP Christopher Davies was convicted of providing false
expenses claims, he was replaced by Liberal Democrat candidate Jane Dodds in
the 2019 Brecon and Radnorshire by-election.
● Each MP has to win a plurality of voters in their constituency in order to get elected, whilst
many win a majority of votes.
○ In South Staffordshire in 2019, for example, Gavin Williamson won 73% of the vote.
Independent MPs As An Example Of Parliament Being Representative
● In the 2024 General Election, 5 Pro-Gaza MPs from areas with high Muslim populations
were elected on a Pro-Palestinian platform. 4 of these MPs unseated Labour MPs as a way
for voters to protest the Labour Party’s support for Israel and MP for Islington North, Jeremy
Corbyn, won with a majority of 7,247.
● In September 2024 the 5 MPs formally announced the formation of an “Independent
Alliance” - giving them the same number of MPs as Reform UK and The Green Party.
○ This allows the MPs to be allocated more parliamentary time to ask questions and
speak in debates, increasing their prominence and effectiveness in Parliament.
● This highlights how Parliament is democratically representative - MPs are elected on a
mandate by individuals in their constituency, and respond to the specific concerns of their
constituents. Forming an Independent Alliance allows the MPs greater opportunity to hold
the government to account over local interests.
○ This also benefits democracy as it enhances pluralism - ensuring all sections of the
electorate have a collective voice in Parliament.
Ways In Which Parliament Isn’t Representative:
● The House of Lords is unelected, yet holds significant powers to influence policy, scrutinise
the government and delay legislation.
● Party leaders, and therefore Prime Ministers, are selected by their parties rather than by the
electorate, with two recent Prime Ministers (Sunak and Truss) not being party leaders in an
election, yet seeking to implement significant political changes.
● The House of Commons is elected using the First Past The Post (FPTP) voting system,
which is very unproportional and unrepresentative in comparison to other voting systems.
○ In the 2024 election, for example, Labour won 63% of the seats in Parliament with
just 33.7% of the vote.
How Representative Is Parliament In Terms Of Representing The Issues Their
Constituents Care About?
Ways In Which Parliament Is Representative:
● The relatively small size of most constituencies, and the fact that a single MP is responsible
for those who live within the constituency, result in effective representation of local interests
and a strong link between the constituency and MP.
○ MPs handle correspondence from their constituents and problems their constituents
have and hold weekly constituency surgeries.
○ MPs also represent their constituents’ interests in Parliament.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 11
■ For example, in October 2022, 33 Conservative MPs rebelled against Liz
Truss’ government and abstained in a vote on banning fracking, despite the
government ordering them to oppose it, including many MP Mark Fletcher of
Bolsover which had a strong local movement against fracking in the area.
● Both the House of Commons and House of Lords also represent the population as a whole
on issues they care about, including holding the government to account, and reflect the
public’s mood.
○ This could be seen in 2022, when there was significant pressure on the
Conservative government from their backbenchers, the opposition and the House of
Lords in response to the Partygate scandal.
○ In the 2024 General Election, 5 Pro-Gaza MPs from areas with high Muslim
populations were elected on a Pro-Palestinian platform. 4 of these MPs unseated
Labour MPs as a way for voters to protest the Labour Party’s support for Israel and
MP for Islington North, Jeremy Corbyn, won with a majority of 7,247.
■ In September 2024 the 5 MPs formally announced the formation of an
“Independent Alliance” - giving them the same number of MPs as Reform
UK and The Green Party.
○ This shows Parliament is democratically representative - MPs are elected on a
mandate by individuals in their constituency, and respond to the specific concerns of
their constituents.
■ Forming an Independent Alliance allows the MPs greater opportunity to hold
the government to account over local interests as they are allocated more
parliamentary time.
Ways In Which Parliament Isn’t Representative:
● MPs often don’t vote according to their constituents’ wishes, instead they almost always
vote according to how they are whipped to do so, in order to keep in favour with their party
and climb the party ladder, therefore giving themselves a chance of becoming a minister.
○ In the last Parliament, the vast majority of MPs rebelled against the party line less
than 2% of the time, with just 14 MPs rebelling more than 5% of the time and the
highest percentage of rebellions being David Davis (Conservative) at 12.6%.
● In the last Parliament over 90 MPs, the vast majority of whom were Conservative MPs, had
second jobs which can be seen as distracting them from representing their constituents.
○ By January 2023, MPs had collectively received over £15m from second jobs since
the 2019 general election.
■ Theresa May alone received £2.5m from giving speeches, including many to
private equity firms in the US.
● It can be argued that MPs focus too much on representing their constituents rather than
performing the other key functions of Parliament, especially scrutiny of the executive.
○ It can be argued that casework in particular should be dealt with by other agencies,
such as councils.
○ Labour MP Yasmin Qureshi representing Bolton South East, for example, reported
that her team handled over 4,200 issues raised by constituents in the first half of
2021, particularly in relation to the mental health consequences of COVID.
● A significant proportion of members of the House of Lords don’t take their role of
scrutinising the executive and representing the public seriously.
○ According to Byline Times, 13% of peers rarely or never attend the House of Lords.
○ Lord Sugar has only cast votes in 1.96% of divisions since joining the House of
Lords.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 12
How Representative Is Parliament In Terms Of Direct Representation?
Ways In Which Parliament Isn’t Representative:
● Parliament remains highly unrepresentative in terms of gender, race and educational
background, amongst other ways.
○ After the 2024 election, just 37% of the House of Commons and 29% of the House
of Lords are women, compared to over half of the population.
■ This is an increase from 34% after the 2019 election.
○ After the 2024 election, just 13% of the House of Commons and 7.3% of the House
of Lords are from minority ethnic backgrounds, compared to over 18% of the
general population.
■ This is an increase from 10% after the 2019 election.
○ After the 2024 election, 23% of the House of Commons and 57% of the House of
Lords went to private schools, compared to just 7% of the general population.
■ Further, 90% of the House of Commons went to university, compared to 42%
of the population, and 20% went to Oxbridge.
■ Of Rishi Sunak’s first cabinet, 61% went to private schools and 45% went to
Oxbridge.
● Starmer’s first cabinet is the most diverse in terms of education
background ever recorded, though, with just 8% of the Cabinet
having attended private school.
■ Just 15% of Labour MPs went to private schools, compared to 46% of
Conservative MPs.
● This lack of direct representation can be seen as a big problem, not only because it is
unjust and a representative parliament would have symbolic value, but also because it
would lead to representatives who are better able to understand the wishes of the
population and who can broaden the political agenda.
○ For example, a male dominated parliament is unlikely to fully understand or seek to
address a lot of the discrimination women face in society.
● There are many reasons for the lack of direct representation in the House of Commons:
○ It doesn’t have a party list electoral system where lists could be made
representative.
■ Instead, MPs are selected by panels in local constituency parties, which are
often made up of older, white middle aged professionals who are likely to
select people similar to them and discriminate against those who aren’t.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 13
○ Those who are discriminated against in society are less likely to put themselves
forward, as they lack the resources to do so and would face significant
discrimination and danger if elected, as can be seen in the murder of Jo Cox.
○ In the 2024 election, of the 4,519 candidates who stood from 98 different parties,
69% of them were male.
Ways In Which Parliament Is Representative:
● 68 MPs in the 2024 Parliament (over 10%) are LGBT+, compared to an estimated 3.1% of
the UK population.
● Representation in terms of gender and ethnicity did also improve between 2019 and 2024,
though not majorly.
● There have also been attempts by parties and the House of Lords to improve direct
representation in Parliament.
○ Parties have used a range of methods to try and improve direct representation,
including using all-women shortlists and headhunting/mentoring promising
candidates from minority backgrounds.
■ This has resulted in some improvements in direct representation in the
House of Commons. After the 1997 election, just 18% of MPs were women
and there were just 9 MPs from minority ethnic backgrounds.
○ The House of Lords Appointment Commission also seeks to appoint Peers with a
range of backgrounds.
■ Of the 63 appointments made between 2000 and 2014, 13 were from a
minority ethnic background.
● Some argue that Parliament isn’t required to be a microcosm of society and that minority
groups can be listened to and represented by Parliament even if they’re not directly
represented.
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A
Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 14
