https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover
UK Government
4 Prime Minister and Executive
● 3.3 The Prime Minister and the Cabinet.
○ 3.3.1 The power of the Prime Minister and the Cabinet.
■ The factors governing the Prime Minister’s selection of ministers.
■ The factors that affect the relationship between the Cabinet and the
Prime Minister, and the ways they have changed, and the balance of
power between the Prime Minister and the Cabinet.
○ 3.3.2 The powers of the Prime Minster and the Cabinet to dictate events and
determine policy.
■ Students must study the influence of one Prime Minister from 1945 to
1997 and one post-1997 Prime Minister.
■ Students may choose any pre-1997 and any post-1997 Prime Minister,
provided that they study them in an equivalent level of detail, covering
both events and policy, with examples that illustrate both control and a
lack of control.
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓
🗣 Key Debates 🗣
● The key debates on this section of the specification are:
○ The extent to which the Prime Minister is now presidential.
○ The extent to which the Prime Minister is able to dominate the cabinet.
○ The extent of the Prime Minister’s power overall.
○ The relative importance of different factors in determining the selection of cabinet
ministers.
○ The relative importance of different factors in influencing the balance of power
between the cabinet and Prime Minister.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 1
● If you make detailed essay plans on the questions in bold below, you should be well
prepared for the exam.
❓Past/Possible Essay Questions❓
● Evaluate the view that Prime Ministers are able to dominate the cabinet. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the cabinet can act as an effective check on prime ministerial power.
(30)
● Evaluate the extent to which the cabinet no longer plays a meaningful role in the UK
political system. (30)
● Evaluate the view that Prime Ministers are free to follow the policies they want. (30)
● Evaluate the view that political loyalty is the most important factor governing the
Prime Minister’s selection of ministers. (30)
● Evaluate the view that ministers’ competence and experience is the most important factor
influencing the Prime Minister’s selection of their Cabinet. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the popularity of the Prime Minister is the most important
factor influencing the balance of power between the Cabinet and Prime Minister. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the wider political and economic context is the most important factor
influencing the balance of power between the Cabinet and Prime Minister.
● Evaluate the view that the Prime Minister is now presidential. (30)
● Evaluate the view that prime ministers have become more presidential in recent years. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the power of the Prime Minister has significantly decreased
since 2010. (30)
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover 1
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓ 1
The Power Of The Prime Minister And The Cabinet 2
How Does The Prime Minister Select Their Cabinet? 2
The Factors Governing The Prime Minister’s Selection Of Ministers 3
The Factors That Affect The Relationship Between The Prime Minister And Cabinet 6
Sunak’s Cabinet Management And Power 12
The Presidentialisation Of The Prime Minister 13
Is The Prime Minister Able To Dominate The Cabinet? 16
Case Studies Of Prime Ministers 17
🔵 Thatcher 🔵 17
🔴 Blair 🔴 19
🔵 Cameron 🔵 21
The Power Of The Prime Minister And The Cabinet
How Does The Prime Minister Select Their Cabinet?
● At the start of their premiership, Prime Ministers select their first cabinet.
● After this, they often ‘reshuffle’ their cabinet by replacing some ministers, in order to
maintain their authority and keep the cabinet fresh.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 2
The Factors Governing The Prime Minister’s Selection Of Ministers
Individual Competence And Experience
● Running a large and complex government department is a very difficult job and Prime
Ministers have to be confident that their minister’s have the experience and specialist
knowledge to run their department effectively.
○ Being an effective communicator in the media is also important, as Prime Ministers
want to ensure cabinet ministers don’t embarrass the government/defend
government policies poorly.
● A key example of Prime Ministers selecting their cabinet according to competence and
experience is Jeremy Hunt being brought in as Chancellor by both Liz Truss and Rishi
Sunak.
○ Having served in the cabinet for 9 years since 2010, Hunt was seen as a safe pair
of hands after Kwasi Kwarteng was sacked and is a key reason why Sunak kept him
as Chancellor after replacing Truss as Prime Minister.
● Other good examples are Rachel Reeves being made Chancellor, Yvette Cooper being
made Home Secretary and James Timpson being made Prisons Minister under Starmer.
○ Not only had Reeves served as Shadow Chancellor for 3 years, she previously
worked for the Bank of England.
○ Cooper is one of the few Labour MPs with significant government experience,
having served as a minister in Blair’s government and in the Cabinet in Brown’s
government.
○ Timpson was made a peer in order to be made Prisons Minister. 10% of his
company’s (Timpsons) workforce are former prisoners and he has long been a
rehabilitation campaigner with significant expertise and a positive reputation.
● This is not always the case, however, with Liz Truss appointing Kwasi Kwarteng and James
Cleverly to important roles, both of whom had limited experience in government.
○ Kwarteng was made Chancellor despite having served in the cabinet for less than 2
years.
● Prime Ministers also often consider the prospects of MPs becoming cabinet ministers in the
future when selecting junior ministers, as they feel a responsibility to keep the party secure
and in a good state for the future.
○ Liz Truss, for example, was made a junior minister by Cameron in 2012 and
remained in cabinet from 2014, enabling her rise in the party before she became
leader and Prime Minister.
Establishing Authority
● Incoming Prime Ministers often seek to stamp their authority over their party by removing
certain cabinet ministers and replacing them with their own allies.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 3
○ When Liz Truss became Prime Minister, she removed important members of
Johnson’s cabinet including Priti Patel, Nadine Dorries and Dominic Raab.
● Rishi Sunak did this too, bringing back Dominic Raab as Justice Secretary, Michael Gove
as Levelling Up Secretary and Suella Braverman as Home Secretary, despite her having
been sacked by Truss for breaking the Ministerial Code.
Loyalty and Political Reliability
● Prime Ministers also seek to reward the loyalty of key allies and bring in ministers they
know will accept collective responsibility and support government policy in public.
○ The Prime Minister must be confident that ministers won't destabilise or embarrass
the government by going off message or questioning its policies.
● Loyalty was a major factor in Liz Truss’ selection of her cabinet, almost all of whom had
supported her in her leadership campaign.
○ Chancellor Kwasi Kwarteng was a key political ally who had limited government
experience.
● Loyalty and political reliability played a major role in Starmer’s selection of his first cabinet,
the vast majority of whom had served in the same shadow cabinet positions for a number of
years. Chancellor Rachel Reeves and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster Pat McFadden
in particular are key allies.
● Loyalty and political reliability must be balanced by Prime Ministers with keeping in favour
with different factions of their party, however.
Ideological Balance
● In order to make sure their party stays united, Prime Ministers often select an ideologically
balanced cabinet which represents different factions of the party. Keeping important
members of the party who may oppose you in the cabinet is effective as they have to sign
up to collective responsibility and are therefore unable to publicly challenge the
government.
○ Theresa May, for example, appointed a cabinet with a balance between Brexiteers
(including Boris Johnson and David Davis) and Remainers (including Phillip
Hammond and Jeremy Hunt).
○ Blair’s cabinets always had some ‘Brownites’ and Brown’s cabinets had some
‘Blairites’
● After leadership elections, Prime Ministers may also offer their failed opponents cabinet
positions.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 4
○ Boris Johnson gave cabinet roles to Matt Hancock, Michael Gove, Dominic Raab
and Sajid Javid.
● More recently, Prime Ministers can be seen to have placed less importance on this
ideological balance. Popular Prime Ministers with large majorities may feel safer appointing
like-minded ministers and often clear out less supportive ministers in cabinet reshuffles.
○ Boris Johnson appointed a significant number of Brexiteers and allies to his first
cabinet, with both the Home Secretary (Priti Patel) and the Foreign Secretary
(Dominic Raab) Brexiteers.
○ Liz Truss didn’t offer Rishi Sunak a cabinet position after defeating him in the 2022
Conservative Party leadership election.
○ Starmer’s first cabinet includes no members from the left faction of the Labour Party,
with Deputy Prime Minister Angela Rayner perhaps being the closest, having served
under Jeremy Corbyn.
Direct Representation and Diversity
● Especially in recent years, Prime Ministers have found it important to ensure their cabinets
are somewhat representative of the population in terms of gender and ethnicity in particular.
○ Blair appointed Margaret Becket as Britain's first female Foreign Secretary and
Brown appointed Jacqui Smith as the first female Home Secretary.
■ Overall, men still formed a significant majority of New Labour’s cabinets,
though.
○ The coalition was criticised for its lack of gender balance with only 4 women in its
first cabinet. Though, Cameron made a point of making Theresa May Home
Secretary and appointing the first Muslim Woman to the cabinet in Baroness Warsi.
○ Boris Johnson’s December cabinet was very representative in terms of ethnic
minorities, with 6 ethnic minority members of cabinet, two of whom (Sunak and
Patel) were in the key offices of state.
○ 11/21 members of Starmer’s first cabinet are women including the first female
Chancellor, though just 3 members are from an ethnic minority background, a drop
from Sunak and Johnson’s cabinets.
● Overall, however, politics, Parliament and the government remains largely dominated by
white men.
Starmer's Cabinet As An Example Of Descriptive Representation:
● Of the 25 ministers currently attending cabinet in early 2025, none are privately educated,
compared to the last 3 Conservative Party cabinets in which over 60% were privately
educated.
○ This is far more descriptively representative of the UK, where only 7% of students
are privately educated. And represents the closest government has been to
genuinely reflecting the educational opportunities of the British population.
● The impact of descriptive representation can be seen in Labour Policy. Rachel Reeves set
out plans to apply VAT to private school fees in the 2024 budget, to raise money for the
93% of children in the UK who attend state schools.
○ This shows how direct representation can lead to governments who are better able
to understand the wishes of the population and represent them when setting the
political agenda.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 5
The Factors That Affect The Relationship Between The Prime Minister And
Cabinet
The Ability Of The Prime Minister To Manage Their Cabinet
The Management Skills Of The Prime Minister:
● An effective Prime Minister can use their powers of patronage to shape the top team in a
way that enhances their power and enables them to promote their policy priorities and
agenda, removing poor performers, bringing in fresh talent and promoting ideological allies.
○ This can allow Prime Ministers to maintain their authority and marginalise the power
of factions/individuals in their party who may want to challenge them for the
leadership/destabilise the government
■ If the Prime Minister becomes too dominant and doesn’t give ministers some
control, though, this may also cause discontent and result in them being
removed by the cabinet, as was the case with Thatcher in 1990 when the
resignation of former ally Geoffrey Howe ultimately triggering a leadership
challenge that brought Thatcher down.
● The Prime Minister depends on ministers to run their departments well, whilst also helping
to drive forward the broader government agenda in the specific policy area of their
department and defending the government effectively in the media.
● Theresa May failed to effectively manage her cabinet and was constantly undermined by
leaking and briefing against the government, by Boris Johnson in particular.
The Prime Minister’s Ability To Set The Agenda:
● The Prime Minister chairs all cabinet meetings and sums up the discussion at the end,
giving them scope to lead people towards their desired position on particular issues.
○ Senior ministers will express their views, which the Prime Minister must address,
however the cabinet rarely votes, leaving the Prime Minister to sum up the
discussion at the end in a way that suits them.
● The Prime Minister can also keep things off the agenda in meetings.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 6
○ Theresa May, for example, prevented a vote within cabinet on whether a ‘no deal’
Brexit should be an option, despite other important cabinet ministers supporting
one.
● David Cameron made austerity key to the coalition’s policies and the responsibility of every
department, therefore effectively setting the government’s and cabinet’s agenda.
● Boris Johnson suffered significant leaking from the Cabinet when he was Prime Minister,
suggesting his limited authority and ability to set the agenda.
○ So far, Rishi Sunak has had less leaking, suggesting he has been able to do so
more effectively.
How Important The Cabinet Is In Decision Making
The Use Of Cabinet Committees and Informal Groups To Make Decisions:
● Prime Ministers have more control in smaller forums and it is easier to reach a compromise
with one or two key ministers than the whole cabinet. As a consequence, they often use
smaller cabinet committees (such as the National Security Council/COVID-19 Strategy
Committee), bi-lateral meeting with ministers and informal groups to make decisions,
shunning the cabinet.
○ Under Tony Blair, he and Chancellor Gordon Brown negotiated with each other to
determine economic policy, whilst Blair often used bi-lateral meetings with important
ministers to determine policy on a particular area, as he felt he could use them to
talk ministers around to his view.
■ Blair’s style of governing was dubbed ‘sofa government’ as a result, as he
largely shunned the cabinet.
○ In the coalition, the ‘Quad’ was used to make a number of key decisions and resolve
issues between the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats. This was formed of
Cameron, his Chancellor George Osbourne, Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg and Lib
Dem Chief Secretary to the Treasury Danny Alexander.
○ Both Theresa May and Boris Johnson used cabinet committees to make decisions
on important issues.
■ Theresa May used the committee on exiting the European Union to make
important decisions on Brexit, whilst Boris Johnson used the COVID-19
Strategy committee to make key decisions on COVID restrictions, with
Health Secretary Matt Hancock and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
Michael Gove having particular power within it.
○ In her short tenure, Liz Truss and Chancellor Kwasi Kwarteng developed their
economic policy with little input from the cabinet, some members of which even
spoke out against the government.
Cameron and Hunt Given Significant Control:
● Sunak has given significant control to both Chancellor Jeremy Hunt and Foreign Secretary
David Cameron, with both being given the autonomy to shape policy and dominate
government messaging in their areas of policy.
○ Cameron has led the UK in peace negotiations on the Israel-Palestine conflict and
the coordinated UK-US response to Houthi attacks in Yemen.
○ Hunt has announced key economic policies himself, rather than the PM doing so
beforehand in the media. For example, he announced the National Insurance tax
cut in the 2023 Autumn Statement.
● This reflects the fact that both have considerable experience and competence in
comparison to the rest of the cabinet and shows that Sunak as PM doesn’t seek to
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 7
completely dominate and sideline the cabinet, but instead allows cabinet government and
gives control to his ministers.
○ This is influenced by the deep unpopularity of both Sunak and the government as a
whole, which undermines Sunak’s support from the party and therefore his ability to
drive through policies without facing opposition from his Cabinet.
○ This is especially the case with Hunt and Cameron, who are arguably the only two
big beasts in the cabinet with significant name recognition and influence in the party
after Bravermann’s sacking.
The Use of Special Advisors To Make Decisions:
● In recent years, Special Advisors (SPADs) have occupied an important role in Downing
Street and in decision making. These are unelected and are hired directly by the Prime
Minister, working closely with them to develop government strategy.
○ John Major had just 8 special advisors, but by 2005 Tony Blair had thirty.
○ Especially before losing her majority, Theresa May relied on special advisors Nick
Timothy and Fiona Hill to help her develop policy and manage government.
○ Despite being unelected, special advisor Dominic Cummings held a very significant
amount of power in Boris Johnson’s government, arguably far more than any
cabinet minister or other member of government.
■ Boris Johnson even took a significant hit to his government’s popularity to
defend Cummings after he broke COVID rules by driving from London to
Barnard Castle.
Sunak’s Special Advisers:
● In March 2023, Rishi Sunak had 43 special advisers working for No 10, with 117 special
advisers in total working across government.
● Key advisers include chief of staff Liam Booth-Smith and Isaac Levido, who ran the
Conservatives’ 2019 election campaign and reportedly played an important role in
convincing Sunak to strongly back motorists and u-turn on the government’s net zero
targets in the summer of 2023.
Starmer’s Special Advisers:
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 8
● By the end of the summer of 2024, Starmer had already appointed over 20 special advisers
working for number 10 and over 80 working across government.
● After only 100 days in Government, Sue Gray stood down as Prime Minister Keir Starmer’s
Chief of Staff, to be replaced by Morgan McSweeney.
○ Sue Gray was previously a senior civil servant and Keir Starmer was subject to
significant scrutiny for hiring her.
● The appointment of McSweeney is said to “shake up” the Government and change its
direction. This highlights the extensive influence unelected advisors have, despite having
no electoral mandate or any accountability.
○ McSweeney has a long working relationship with Starmer and will enjoy
unparalleled access to the Prime Minister, and may hold more power than cabinet
ministers over the policy programme of Government.
The Growth Of Downing Street:
● Whilst in the past Prime Ministers had little central support and relied a great deal on the
cabinet as ministers had the administrative support of large departments, modern Prime
Ministers are well supported by the Prime Minister's Office and the Cabinet Office, which
worked closely with Downing Street under Blair to coordinate policy across departments.
○ These resources are now arguably greater than those available to a minister and
enable the Prime Minister to have an overview of policy and drive delivery and
strategy across government.
● At first, Cameron deliberately tried to allow ministers more autonomy to run their
departments, but after some policies ran into difficulty, he strengthened the centre
somewhat again with the creation of a Policy and Implementation Unit in 2011.
● Under Blair, Downing Street also tried to exercise considerable control over the
government's messaging in the media, using the Communications and Strategy Directorate
in Downing Street. Ministers were sent a line for the day and speeches on policy had to be
checked before being delivered in a bid to present a clear and coherent message.
○ Blair also had a new Strategy Unit to work on developing long-term policies and a
Delivery Unit to monitor the progress of departments in meeting their targets.
● Under Boris Johnson during COVID, daily televised press briefings were used to control
government messaging in relation to the pandemic.
The Political And Party Context
The Size Of A Government’s Majority:
● When a Prime Minister has a large majority, it strengthens their power and control over the
party and cabinet, as they can risk upsetting certain parts of the party whilst still knowing
they will be able to pass legislation through Parliament.
○ Blair's majorities meant he could endure several rebellions from the Labour left
without suffering serious defeats.
● When a Prime Minister has a smaller majority, by contrast, rebellions can be a lot more
damaging and Prime Ministers therefore have less control over their cabinet, as they need
to keep key individuals in cabinet and factions of the party on side.
○ Theresa May had much less control over her cabinet after losing her majority in the
2017 election, with Brexit-supporting ministers, Boris Johnson in particular,
consistently briefing against the government and sometimes even speaking against
the government.
Limited Leaking/Dissent From Starmer’s Cabinet So Far:
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 9
● So far since the election of the Labour government in the 2024 election, there has been
very limited leaking from the cabinet and there has been no real challenge to Keir Starmer’s
leadership/policy decisions, with all members of the cabinet defending them strongly in the
media.
○ This is despite the fact that Starmer and the Labour Party in general are very
unpopular for a government that has just been elected with a huge majority.
○ Starmer’s net favourability in February 2025 was -40% and the Labour Party has
been matched by Reform UK in some recent polls.
● This could be used to suggest that having a large government majority allows the Prime
Minister to dominate their Cabinet, even when they are unpopular.
○ On the other hand, it could also be argued that it is simply due to the fact that there
are few big beasts within the Cabinet who can properly challenge the Prime
Minister, or that it is because the government is still relatively new.
Party Prospects And The Popularity Of The Prime Minister:
● The popularity of a Prime Minister with the public is a highly important factor in influencing
whether they are able to exercise control over their cabinet and party.
○ If a Prime Minister is popular with the electorate, they will be supported by their
cabinet and party as they will help MPs and cabinet members get elected at the
next election and therefore keep their jobs.
○ If a Prime Minister is unpopular, however, they will be seen as an electoral liability
and their party and cabinet will often turn on them and seek to remove them.
● Thatcher was very popular mid-way through being Prime Minister, however became very
unpopular with the public and cabinet after trying to push through with the Poll tax despite
its unpopularity and the cabinet opposing it. This was a key factor in key members of her
cabinet resigning and ultimately bringing her down.
● In the year after the 2019 election, Boris Johnson was a major electoral asset to the
Conservative Party and hence had strong control over his party and cabinet. As he became
less popular with the public however, especially with the Partygate scandal, the cabinet
gained in power and he was eventually forced out by key members of the cabinet resigning,
including Rishi Sunak and Sajid Javid.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 10
● Liz Truss’ failed mini-budget led to a huge drop in support for the Conservative Party in the
polls. As a result, her cabinet and party forced her out after just 54 days in charge.
How Unified A Party Is
● Divisions over policy within a governing party can cause problems for a Prime Minister, who
may struggle to keep the support of opposing factions within a party.
○ In one way or another, divisions over Europe have caused difficulties for every
Conservative Party leader from Major to May.
■ Theresa May in particular struggled to keep the support of a party that was
divided between one-nation conservatives and hard Brexiteers in the
European Research Group (ERG) in particular.
○ The division between Blairites and Brownites under New Labour caused problems
for each respective leader.
● Boris Johnson had more success in controlling the party in the early years of his
premiership, as the party was united after he kicked out many one-nation conservatives
from the party and replaced them in the 2019 election with Brexiteers who were personally
loyal to him.
The Wider Political And Economic Situation
● The Prime Minister's ability to control the cabinet will also to a large degree be shaped by
external events and pressures.
● Crises can define a Prime Minister’s premiership and harm their popularity.
○ This can be seen for Gordon Brown following the 2008 Financial Crisis.
○ That said, crises can also enhance a Prime Minister's reputation and control over
the cabinet if they are seen to handle them well.
■ Blair's response to Princess Diana's death boosted his standing as a new
Prime Minister, whilst Cameron was praised for his response to the 2011
riots.
● Prime Ministers are more likely to be popular and have effective control over their cabinet
and party when they are presiding over a successful economy.
○ This was the case for both Thatcher and Blair.
● Once the economy took a massive hit from Truss’ mini-budget, it became very likely she
would keep her position, whilst her cabinet increasingly spoke out against her.
Starmer’s Effective Handling Of Trump and Ukraine:
● In late February/early March 2025, Keir Starmer was seen by many as having his best
week yet as Prime Minister, due to his effective handling of foreign policy which gave off the
appearance of principled, decisive and effective diplomacy. He was even praised by former
Conservative Foreign Secretary James Cleverly.
○ Starmer first had a surprisingly effective meeting with Donald Trump, where Trump
indicated he was unlikely to put tariffs on the UK, may pursue a trade deal and was
inclined to accept the Chagos Islands deal.
○ Starmer then showed solidarity with Zelensky after a spat with Trump at the White
House by inviting him to Downing Street publicly and seeking to mend relations
between Ukraine and the United States.
● This demonstrates how foreign policy and events can impact the popularity and reputation
of a Prime Minister, even if these events are largely related to foreign policy.
○ It also clearly showed the Prime Minister’s central role in foreign policy, which
supports the ‘presidentialisation of the PM’ thesis, as they are clearly the Head of
State in practice when it comes to diplomacy and key international meetings/crises.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 11
Sunak’s Cabinet Management And Power
Sunak Passed Key Pieces Of Legislation And Faced Few Defeats Despite Unpopularity:
● Sunak was defeated just once in the House of Commons as Prime Minister and was
successful in uniting the Conservative Party to pass important pieces of legislation,
including the Safety of Rwanda Act 2024, Strikes (Minimum Service Levels) Act 2023 and
Public Order Act 2023.
● This is despite him being deeply unpopular as a Prime Minister and the Conservative Party
as a whole being way behind Labour in the polls during his premiership.
○ Only 20% of the public had a positive opinion of Sunak, according to a YouGov poll
in May 2024.
● This shows how Prime Ministers and governments are able to pass key pieces of legislation
and unite the party when they have a significant majority in Parliament, even if they are
deeply unpopular.
○ This being said, Sunak did hold a free vote on the Tobacco and Vapes Act in April
2024 to avoid having to try to whip members of the party in line, with a significant
segment of the party and cabinet being opposed on libertarian grounds.
○ 57 Conservative MPs including Minister Kemi Badenoch voted against on the
grounds of government overreach into individual freedom.
Sunak’s Success In Creating Cabinet Unity:
● In comparison to his predecessors, Rishi Sunak’s cabinet saw much less leaking/briefing
against the government, especially since the sacking of Suella Bravermann in November
2023.
● One key explanation for this is that following Bravermann’s sacking, there were no big
beasts within the cabinet who could claim to represent a faction of the Conservative Party.
They therefore lacked the power to challenge the Prime Minister without easily being fired.
○ Another explanation is that ministers saw little point in challenging the Prime
Minister given the unpopularity of the party and likelihood they will lose the next
election. Even though Sunak is deeply unpopular, they resigned themselves to the
fact that they would lose and that someone else may be worse.
Increasing Criticism Of Sunak From The Right Of The Conservative Party:
● In the second half of 2023 and in 2024, Rishi Sunak faced significant criticism from the right
wing of the Conservative Party, who blamed his leadership for the party falling further and
further behind Labour in the polls.
● After resigning from his role in Sunak's cabinet in November 2023, Jenrick publicly criticised
the Prime Minister for what he perceived as an insufficiently strong approach to tackling
illegal immigration and managing the asylum system, calling for a stricter stance and
accusing the government of wavering on key conservative principles.
● Similarly, Suella Bravermann, ousted as Home Secretary at a similar time, lambasted
Sunak following the May 2024 local elections. She condemned his leadership, blaming him
for the Conservative Party's electoral losses and criticising his inability to deliver on the
hard-line immigration policies and "war on woke" agenda that she argued were essential to
rally the party's core base and secure future electoral success.
● This shows how the electoral failure and unpopularity of the Conservative Party
undermined Sunak’s control over the party.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 12
The Presidentialisation Of The Prime Minister
What Does The ‘Presidentialisation’ Of The Prime Minister Imply?
● The ‘Presidentialisation’ of the Prime Minister suggests that the Prime Minister increasingly
acts like and has the powers of a US President.
● It is linked to Michael Foley’s concept of ‘Spatial Leadership’ that suggests that Prime
Ministers are becoming more like US presidents by distancing themselves from the party
and government for which they are responsible.
○ They present themselves as outsiders and develop personal popularity using the
media in particular.
○ In the 2019 election, for example, Boris Johnson distanced himself from the
Conservative Party that had been in power for 9 years and sought to present
himself as offering the electorate a change. His personal popularity was important to
the Conservative Party being able to win over significant numbers of former Labour
voters in the Red Wall.
What Arguments Are There That The Prime Minister Has Become More Presidential?
Prime Ministers Often Behave Like The Head Of State:
● The Prime Minister often acts like a head of state, particularly in the context of foreign
policy and in emergencies when they can rally the country behind them.
○ Tony Blair drove foreign policy in the Iraq War and had a very close personal
relationship with George Bush.
○ During the Brexit process, it was the Prime Minister that played a key role in
determining the Withdrawal Agreement and negotiating with the EU.
○ The Prime Minister represents the United Kingdom in international conferences
such as the G7 and G20.
■ Gordon Brown, for example, played an important role in hosting the G20 in
London in 2009 and coordinating the international response to the 2008
Financial Crisis.
○ During the COVID-19 Pandemic, Prime Minister Boris Johnson was initially very
popular and rallied the country behind him against the pandemic, whilst hosting
regular press conferences about the pandemic on TV.
○ In February/March 2025 Starmer represented the U.K. in key foreign policy
meetings centrered on the Ukraine War, including a bilateral meeting with Donald
Trump, a meeting with Zelensky and a meeting with European leaders to decide
how to respond to the U.S. decreasing foreign aid for Ukraine.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 13
Prime Ministers Use The Media To Reach Out To The Public And Develop Personal Popularity:
● The Prime Minister can use the media and their personal popularity to reach out to the
public and create a level of personal support that can allow them to determine and drive
through policy. This has been aided by the growth of television and social media, as well as
TV debates between leaders becoming key fixtures of campaigns.
○ Tony Blair was very successful in courting support from the right-wing press and
developing his personal image. Due to his very high popularity at the start of his
premiership, he was able to determine a lot of government policy himself, for
example in health and education, where there was a lot of centralised control.
○ Boris Johnson was very personally popular at the start of his premiership, with his
charismatic personality appealing beyond the traditional Conservative Party base.
● Coverage of British Politics is largely centred around party leaders, including during Prime
Minister’s Questions.
Prime Ministers Increasingly Rely On Non-Elected Advisors Rather Than Their Cabinet And
Seek To Determine All Of The Government’s Policy:
● In recent years, Special Advisors (SPADs) have occupied an important role in Downing
Street and in decision making. These are unelected and are hired directly by the Prime
Minister, working closely with them to develop government strategy.
● The growth of Downing Street means that modern Prime Ministers are well supported by
the Prime Minister's Office and the Cabinet Office, which worked closely with Downing
Street under Blair to coordinate policy across departments.
● Downing Street has therefore grown into a kind of West Wing supporting the Prime Minister,
leading to less reliance on the cabinet for decision-making and determining policy.
Prime Minister’s Have Sought To Distance Themselves From The Rest Of Government And
Their Party:
● Some Prime Ministers have sought to distance themselves from their party in order to gain
personal support.
○ In the 2019 election, for example, Boris Johnson distanced himself from the
Conservative Party that had been in power for 9 years and sought to present
himself as offering the electorate a change, including a move away from austerity.
■ His personal popularity was important to the Conservative Party being able
to win over significant numbers of former Labour voters in the Red Wall.
○ At points, Blair was far more personally popular than the Labour Party and he
sought to present himself as somewhat separate from it and driving change away
from the traditional Labour Party.
What Arguments Are There That The Prime Minister Hasn’t Become More
Presidential?
The Prime Minister Is Still Accountable To The Legislature And Party, Both Of Which Can
Remove Them:
● Prime Minister’s are ultimately not Presidents. They are accountable both to their party and
to Parliament and have to keep both on side in order to effectively pursue their goals.
○ Prime Ministers rely on MPs to pass the government’s legislative agenda and
therefore have to maintain their support.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 14
○ Prime Ministers also need to maintain the support of their cabinet, who will remove
a Prime Minister if they feel they aren’t an electoral asset or sideline the cabinet too
much.
■ It can be argued that the office of the Prime Minister is elastic; the more a
PM attempts to expand the office the more resistance they face.
● This can be seen with Thatcher who was ultimately removed by her
cabinet after seeking to grow her own power too much.
The Prime Minister Still Relies On The Cabinet:
● The UK Government operates under a core-executive model where power is very
fragmented and the Prime Minister can’t control all of government policy. Instead, they can
seek to act as managers, using their appointments power and their ability to offer some
coordination in an effort to gain as much influence as possible.
○ This leads to the Prime Minister still relying on cabinet ministers to run their
departments, whilst relying on cabinet decision making to settle key disputes and
pass policies, especially when there is a cabinet rivalry or the government has a
small majority/limited popularity.
■ When Theresa May was seeking to introduce a Brexit deal, the hardline
Brexiteers in her cabinet (as well as the DUP and the fact she lacked a
majority), including Boris Johnson, had a lot of influence due to their support
among the party and forced Theresa May to a harder Brexit deal.
○ This has especially been the case since 2010, when there have been a series of
governments with small majorities/coalitions.
Events and a Divided Party Can Limit The Prime Minister’s Ability To Act Like A Head Of
State:
● The ability of a Prime Minister to act like a President is limited by their personality and
events outside of their control.
○ Prime Ministers who lack charisma and are hampered by events outside of their
control are much less likely to be able to act presidentially.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 15
■ Whilst Blair and Thatcher may have been able to be more presidential, John
Major, Gordon Brown and Theresa May were much less able to do so.
○ Prime Ministers are also hampered by the size of their majority and personal
popularity.
■ David Cameron, for example, struggled to act presidentially as he was in
charge of a coalition government and therefore needed to cooperate with the
Liberal Democrats both in Parliament and the cabinet.
Is The Prime Minister Able To Dominate The Cabinet?
Arguments That The Prime Minister Can Dominate The Cabinet
● In recent decades, the role of the cabinet in decision making has decreased significantly.
○ Rather than there being ‘cabinet government’ like there used to be, where all
government decisions were made by the cabinet, the Prime Minister now uses
cabinet committees, bi-laterals and informal groupings to make decisions and relies
on an extensive network of SPADs.
○ Leadership is more personalised and centred around the Prime Minister.
● The Prime Minister is often able to use the media to distance themselves from their party
somewhat and develop personal popularity in order to drive through their own agenda,
using a Downing Street apparatus that has grown in power.
○ This is particularly the case for popular Prime Ministers with large majorities.
● The Prime Minister can use their power of patronage to have significant influence over the
cabinet, by selecting a cabinet that is loyal to them and using reshuffles to hire/fire ministers
and maintain their authority.
○ Collective Ministerial Responsibility forces ministers to support the government
publicly.
Arguments That The Prime Minister Can’t Dominate The Cabinet
● The cabinet can play a crucial role in weakening the power of a Prime Minister and causing
their downfall through resigning if they no longer support the Prime Minister, which usually
happens when the Prime Minister is no longer an electoral asset to the party.
○ Boris Johnson, Margaret Thatcher and Theresa May were ultimately brought down
by ministers resigning.
○ Collective Ministerial Responsibility is often limited, especially when a Prime
Minister is weak.
■ It largely broke down under Theresa May.
● Prime Ministers rely on the cabinet to settle key disputes, run departments and pass
policies, especially when there is a cabinet rivalry or the Prime Minister has a weak/no
majority.
○ The UK Government operates under a core-executive model where power is very
fragmented and the Prime Minister can’t control all of government policy. Instead,
they can seek to act as managers, using their appointments power and their ability
to offer some coordination in an effort to gain as much influence as possible.
● The cabinet is highly important for a government to project unity to the public at a time of
crisis and is important in decision making during a crisis, as joined up decision making
between departments is essential.
○ For example during COVID, Johnson not only wanted to present a united front, but
also relied a lot on government ministers, especially Health Secretary Matt
Hancock.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 16
● When there are ‘big beasts’ as ministers, Prime Ministers have to recognise their status and
support across the party and keep them happy.
Case Studies Of Prime Ministers
🔵 Thatcher 🔵
Thatcher’s Main Policies/Achievements
● Thatcher is generally viewed as one of only two agenda-setting postwar prime ministers,
along with Clement Attlee. She was and is an extremely divisive figure.
○ Thatcher won election 3 times (with a majority of 43 in 1979, 144 in 1983 and 102 in
1987).
● Thatcher significantly changed the industrial relations landscape: weakening trade unions
with 5 key pieces of legislation and crucially winning in the miners' strike of 1984-45.
● The government's privatisation programme saw many huge industries (such as British Gas,
British Airways and water companies) having their shares sold.
○ Thatcher’s monetarist, neoliberal economic policies fundamentally changed and
improved the economy in the 1980s and dragged it out of the Winter of Discontent.
○ She was aided in this by the discovery of North Sea Oil, though.
● The victory in the Falklands' War boosted her approval ratings when they were very low,
playing an important part in her 1983 election victory
○ She, along with Reagan, was given much of the credit for 'defeating' communism,
following the collapse of the USSR and was nicknamed the ‘Iron Lady’.
● Thatcher staunchly defended British interests in Europe, resisting moves to create a
stronger political union whilst championing the European Economic Community.
● Thatcher introduced the ‘Right To Buy’, which enabled many to buy their social housing and
get onto the property ladder
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 17
Thatcher’s Main Failures/Setbacks
● Up until 1982, Thatcher was very unpopular, having introduced unpopular economic
measures that didn't yet appear to be having a beneficial effect on the economy.
○ Her election victory in 1983 can be seen as fortunate and very dependent on the
Falklands War.
● Due to her conviction style and sidelining of her cabinet, Thatcher became very unpopular
with her cabinet at the end of her reign and was forced to join the Exchange Rate
Mechanism by Chancellor John Major before being forced to resign.
● The introduction of the Poll Tax in 1989/90 was hugely unpopular, leading to huge riots in
London and councils finding it difficult to administer and collect, with many people refusing
to pay.
○ Thatcher had pursued the policy despite opposition from all sides, including within
her own party, and without consulting local authorities fully.
● Thatcher failed to contain the violence of the IRA, as shown by the 1984 Brighton Bombing,
which was an attempted assassination attempt on Thatcher.
Thatcher’s Strengths As A Prime Minister
● Thatcher was a conviction politician with an extremely dominant personality, who refused to
compromise with her opponents. Her supporters thought of her as principled and visionary.
● Through policies such as the Right To Buy scheme, Thatcher was able to become popular
beyond the traditional Conservative Party base and win the support of some working class
voters.
● In the early years of her premiership, Thatcher's skilful management of cabinet, which she
made much less use of than her predecessors, enabled her to cement her authority when
her approval ratings were low and when many ministers doubted her policies.
○ She brought in important allies including Nigel Lawson and Geoffrey Howe.
● Her refusal to bow to pressure and tone down the monetarist budget of 1981 at a time of
recession and the unwillingness of her cabinet critics to seize the initiative, proved decisive.
Thatcher was then able to construct a cabinet of ideological allies (dries).
○ It was this monetarist budget that ultimately played a key role in improving the
economy and her legitimacy thereafter.
Thatcher’s Weaknesses As A Prime Minister
● Thatcher made less use of her cabinet than her predecessors, keeping many issues away
from cabinet and often beginning cabinet discussions by announcing government policy on
an issue.
○ Senior ministers accused her of paying greater attention to her advisers than to
them.
○ By 1990, this meant she had few allies in her cabinet, leading to her forced
resignation. By ignoring the concerns of ministers and bypassing the cabinet, she
failed to recognise her dependence on it and alienated colleagues whose support
she needed.
● Thatcher was stubborn and uncompromising.
○ Despite facing huge criticism, she introduced Section 28 in 1988, which was
extremely homophobic, banning the ‘promotion of homosexuality’ in schools.
○ When introducing the poll tax, Thatcher ignored warnings from the chancellor and
Treasury and didn't fully consult local authorities.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 18
🔴 Blair 🔴
Blair’s Main Policies/Achievements
● Blair won decisively in 1997, gained almost the same number of seats in the 2001 election
and, despite losing 100 seats, won with a majority of 66 in May 2005.
○ He didn't suffer a defeat in the Commons until the autumn of 2005, on a proposal to
extend the time terror suspects could be held w/o being charged.
○ He was a centrist Labour Party Leader who followed the ‘Third Way’ approach.
● Perhaps Blair's most outstanding personal success was the revival of the peace process in
Northern Ireland, resulting in the creation of power-sharing institutions following the April
1998 Good Friday Agreement.
○ Blair was an effective negotiator and able to build personal relationships with key
individuals on both sides.
● In his first term, Blair put through a number of constitutional reforms which modernised the
political system without jeopardising the authority of central government.
● Blair had relative success in introducing the ideas and methods of the business sector to
improve the delivery of the public sector, particularly education and health.
○ Self-governing city academies, receiving their funding directly from central govt
rather than local authorities, began to replace failing state schools and provided a
model that was developed by later govts.
○ The introduction of foundation hospitals, giving managers additional powers and
funding, were another step away from the Traditional Labour view that the state
should guarantee a uniform model of welfare provision.
● Blair managed to capture and represent the public mood in his response to Princess
Diana's death, with his approval ratings reaching over 90% just after.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 19
Blair’s Main Setbacks/Failures
● After he took Britain to war in Iraq in 2003, Blair began to lose credibility and after he left
office there was a serious question mark over the nature of Blair's achievement and his
overall legacy.
○ The Iraq war inflicted particular lasting damage on Blair's reputation, as, though
Saddam Hussein was rapidly removed, order inside the country disintegrated and
Allied troops faced prolonged guerrilla resistance.
○ Critics focused on Blair's willingness to go to war on the basis of unsubstantiated
claims that Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction, as well as his failure to
formulate a plan with the US for the reconstruction of Iraq after the toppling of
Saddam.
● Within months of Blair becoming PM in 1997, he faced criticism following the revelation that
Bernie Ecclestone, a motor-racing boss, had donated £1M to Labour.
○ It was alleged that there was a link between this and a delay in implementing a ban
on tobacco advertising in F1 racing.
○ Blair was forced to justify himself on TV, but the money was subsequently returned.
Blair’s Strengths As A Prime Minister
● Blair ruthlessly insisted upon party unity and discipline and was very aware of how to
project a winning image through the media.
○ He remodelled Labour as an attractive, modernising centre party. This, together with
Major's evident weaknesses, gave him a decisive victory in the 1997 election.
○ While in opposition, Blair mercilessly taunted Major over his divided party, saying to
the Commons in April 1995: 'There is one very big difference, I lead my party, he
follows his.'
● For a time, Blair was extraordinarily popular, with a mandate to make significant policy
changes.
○ He inherited a recovering economy and left office before the financial crash,
therefore always operating in a favourable economic context.
● Blair placed a strong emphasis on strengthening the centre of UK government, in order to
cut across departments and tackle problems in a more 'joined up' manner.
○ The Cabinet Office and Downing Street Policy Unit worked more closely together
and, from 2001, a newly created Prime Minister's Delivery Unit sought to drive
public sector reform.
● Under Blair, informal meetings with selected colleagues and advisers became the normal
practice, with bilateral meetings with cabinet ministers being used to review progress on the
attainment of policy goals. This increased Blair’s power to direct events.
○ This preference for informal meetings, which bypassed established committee
structures and at which proper records were not kept, was dubbed 'sofa
government'.
Blair’s Weaknesses As A Prime Minister
Marginalisation Of The Cabinet:
● The use of informal meetings and ‘sofa government’ greatly marginalised Blair’s cabinet.
The most spectacular example of which was the way in which decisions were taken prior to
the 2003 Iraq War. Though it did feature on the cabinet agenda, there was little genuine
discussion around the table and ministers were denied access to many key documents.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 20
○ This was criticised by former Cabinet Secretary Lord Butler in a 2004 review, which
warned that the exclusion of the Cabinet from the process 'risks reducing the scope
for informed collective political judgement'.
○ He can be seen as a presidential Prime Minister.
Gordon Brown:
● Gordon Brown's presence as chancellor placed a significant limitation on Blair's power
within government.
○ The two men had struck an informal deal in May 1994 after the sudden death of
Labour leader John Smith. Brown gave Blair a clear run at the party leadership in
return for the post of chancellor when they came into power.
○ In addition, Brown believed Blair would eventually step down and allow him to
become PM, however, when this hadn't happened before the end of Labour's
second term, relations between the two deteriorated.
■ The need to keep Brown on side influenced Blair's decision to announce that
his 3rd general election victory would be his last. The ensuing speculation as
to when the handover would occur reduced Blair's authority.
○ The difficult relationship between the two also meant that Blair had to concede a
significant amount of control over a number of policy areas.
■ For example, Brown effectively denied Blair his wish to join the European
Single Currency, by devising 5 economic tests that would first have to be
passed and insisting that the treasury would determine when they had been
met.
○ These tensions meant that, although Blair had the advantage of a broadly united
party, with most Labour MPs grateful to him for delivering 3 successive election
victories, there were destabilising conflicts between 'Blairite' and 'Brownite' factions.
🔵 Cameron 🔵
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 21
Cameron’s Main Policies/Achievements
● Cameron introduced a number of progressive social policies, including the legalisation of
same-sex marriage.
● Increased the minimum wage and the personal allowance, as well as reducing taxes on
those with very high incomes.
● Cameron's government brought the UK out of recession and stabilised the financial system
following the 2008 Financial Crash, by introducing a harsh programme of austerity that is
since seen as having damaging effects in a range of areas.
● Managed to keep together a coalition for a whole 5 years.
● Prevented Scotland from becoming independent in the 2014 Scottish Independence
Referendum
● He introduced further devolution to Scotland and Wales
● He continued education reform, through promoting academies.
Cameron’s Main Setbacks/Failures
● He only won a small majority in 2015 and only won a decent majority in 2010 because of a
coalition with the Lib Dems.
○ He also benefited from facing a disunited and weak opposition Labour Party.
● The Conservative Party remained divided over Europe throughout his premiership, which
became a major barrier to Cameron becoming a dominant leader.
● He was unable to intervene militarily in Syria due to parliament voting against it.
● Cameron called and lost the 2016 EU referendum, leading to his resignation. Whilst failing
to prepare the civil service for a leave vote.
● Cameron was criticised for making a number of policy u-turns, including plans for the
reorganisation of the NHS introduced by Secretary of State for Health Andrew Lansley.
● The Liberal Democrats’ proposed House of Lords reform was defeated, making the
coalition difficult thereafter and preventing boundary review which was the tradeoff.
● Austerity had a very negative impact on local politics, as council budgets were cut a great
deal.
Cameron's Strengths As A Prime Minister
● Cameron managed to unite the Conservative Party and Liberal Democrats behind the need
for austerity and get the whole of the cabinet to implement it.
● He managed to prevent challenges to his leadership by forming strong bonds with Osborne,
Clegg and May and keeping opponents, such as Gove, Johnson and Ian Duncan Smith
near the centre of power.
● Cameron appeared temperamentally suited to coalition and allowed ministers greater
freedom to get on with their jobs, adopting a more collegial approach than Thatcher or Blair,
whilst using a seemingly successful method of decision making with the Quad.
○ He was also able to remove the Conservative Party’s image as the ‘nasty party’.
● He had a solid majority with the Lib Dems.
Cameron's Weaknesses As A Prime Minister
● Due to the Coalition Agreement, Cameron often lacked control and he had problems
exerting the personal power he would've liked to wield.
● Internal divisions over Europe constantly made his party difficult to lead and ultimately led
to his downfall.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 22
● To a certain extent, the coalition constrained Cameron's power as PM, limiting his power of
patronage and ability to come up with and pass policy ideas, whilst meaning he had to
constantly manage tensions between the two parties as well as within his own.
● Cameron never had a comfortable parliamentary majority.
○ He failed to win the 2010 election and had to give Clegg significant influence and 5
cabinet posts.
○ He won the 2015 election by a majority of just 12.
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A
Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 23
