https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover
UK Government
4 Relations Between the Branches
● 4.4 The location of sovereignty in the UK political system.
○ The distinction between legal sovereignty and political sovereignty.
○ The extent to which sovereignty has moved between different branches of
government.
○ Where sovereignty can now be said to lie in the UK.
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓
🗣 Key Debates 🗣
● The key debate is in relation to how sovereignty is distributed in the UK and the extent to
which the UK Parliament remains sovereign.
○ If you make a detailed essay plan on the question in bold below, which you can then
adapt to different, more specific questions that will come up, this will prepare you
well for your exams.
❓Past/Possible Essay Questions❓
● Evaluate the view that the UK Parliament holds the most sovereignty of any body in the UK.
(30)
● Evaluate the view that Parliament is no longer sovereign in the UK. (30)
● Evaluate the view that Parliament has recently regained its sovereignty. (30)
● Evaluate how far Parliament retains sole sovereignty within the UK political system. (30)
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 1
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover 1
❓Potential Essay Questions/Key Debates❓ 1
An Introduction To Sovereignty 2
The Concept Of Sovereignty 2
🏛 Parliamentary Sovereignty In The UK 🏛 3
The Extent To Which Legal Sovereignty Has Moved Between Different Branches Of Government 4
How The Legal Sovereignty Of Parliament Has Been Challenged In Recent Decades 4
The European Union 4
Devolution 5
🗳 The Use Of Referendums 🗳 5
The Human Rights Act and Supreme Court 6
❓ Where Does Sovereignty Now Lie In The UK❓ 6
The Executive 6
The People 6
Devolved Bodies 7
The Judiciary 9
🏛 Parliament 🏛 9
Overall Analysis Of Sovereignty In The UK 10
An Introduction To Sovereignty
The Concept Of Sovereignty
What Is Sovereignty?
● Sovereignty is a power which cannot be overruled.
○ It is the source of all political powers. A sovereign body can delegate its powers to
others, but reserves the right to recover these powers whenever it wants to.
● Sovereignty can only be removed or transferred, at least in a democracy, by some special
procedures which usually involve popular consent.
What Is Legal Sovereignty?
● Legal sovereignty is a concept defined in law.
○ It belongs to the person or body in a state with unlimited legal authority.
○ In the UK it has traditionally belonged to parliament.
What Is Political Sovereignty?
● Political/popular sovereignty stands above legal sovereignty and is sovereignty in
practice/reality.
○ In a democracy, the legal sovereign body derives its authority from the people.
When the people elect a parliament they delegate their political authority to their
representatives.
● The people therefore have real political sovereignty. Through elections, they delegate legal
sovereignty to Parliament.
○ If the people aren’t happy with Parliament, they will remove them through elections,
or if necessary a revolution.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 2
🏛 Parliamentary Sovereignty In The UK 🏛
How Different Bodies Can Hold Legal Sovereignty
● In different countries, different bodies hold legal sovereignty. In the US, for example, it is the
codified constitution that is sovereign.
● In the UK, Parliament has traditionally been sovereign.
○ Constitutional theorist A.V. Dicey was important in setting this out. In 1885 he
argued that the two key ‘pillars’ underpinning the UK constitution were parliamentary
sovereignty and the rule of law.
Parliamentary Sovereignty
● Parliamentary Sovereignty refers to the fact that the UK Parliament is legally ‘sovereign’
within the UK constitution:
○ It is the key law making and amending body in Britain (when Dicey was writing, it
was the only law making and amending body).
○ It can make laws on any subject, including making changes to the constitution.
○ It cannot bind its successors nor be bound by its predecessors.
■ No law, including constitutional laws, can be entrenched.
○ No court or higher body, including the Supreme Court, can strike down a law passed
by parliament.
Labour’s Repeal Of Laws Passed By The Previous Parliament:
● One of the most important aspects of parliamentary sovereignty is that the UK Parliament
can’t bind its successors or be bound by its predecessors, meaning that a law passed by
one parliament can’t force a future parliament to do something, because that future
parliament can simply repeal the law.
● This was clear when Labour came into power in 2024 with a huge majority and quickly
started the process of repealing laws made by the previous Parliament, including:
○ They introduced the Employment Rights Bill which will include the repeal of the
Strikes (Minimum Service Levels) Act 2023.
○ They introduced the Border Security, Asylum and Immigration Bill which will include
the repeal of the Safety of Rwanda (Asylum and Immigration) Act 2024.
○ These were both laws passed by the previous Parliament that were key policies of
Sunak’s Conservative government.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 3
The Extent To Which Legal Sovereignty Has Moved Between
Different Branches Of Government
How The Legal Sovereignty Of Parliament Has Been Challenged In Recent
Decades
● In the mid-20th century, the legal sovereignty of Parliament was unquestionable.
● The following developments that have taken place in recent decades, though, have
challenged the legal sovereignty of parliament and can be seen as watering it down to a
certain extent by transferring some legal sovereignty to different branches of government.
The European Union
How some legal sovereignty was transferred to the EU
● In 1972, the UK passed the European Communities Act and joined the European Economic
Community (EEC), which then developed into the European Union (EU).
● In doing so, the UK accepted the supremacy of EU Law over laws passed by Parliament
and therefore the sovereignty of EU law.
○ This meant that if a law was passed by the UK Parliament that contradicted EU law,
the European Court of Justice and Supreme Court could strike it down and force
Parliament to remove/change it.
■ The supremacy of EU law was confirmed in the 1990 Factortame Case,
when the Law Lords ruled that the Merchant Shipping Act 1988 passed by
the UK Parliament breached EU law as it required UK registered ships to
have a majority of British owners. As a consequence, the UK Parliament was
forced to unmake the law.
○ The EU controlled many significant areas of policy, in particular trade, agriculture,
fisheries and many other aspects of regulation. This therefore limited the extent to
which Parliament was the key law making body in the UK, as there were key areas
of policy it didn’t legislate on.
The debate over how much legal sovereignty was lost to the European Union
● Those who supported EU membership argued that sovereignty wasn't lost through EU
membership, but pooled with the sovereignty of other countries, and the UK therefore
gained influence on the global stage it couldn't have on its own.
○ They also argue that globalisation means no state can be truly independent.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 4
● Moderate Eurosceptics argued sovereignty could be reclaimed by negotiating opt-outs from
EU policies to which they objected.
○ For example, Britain opted out from adopting the Euro as a currency as they were
not willing to surrender economic sovereignty and control over interest rates to the
European Central Bank
● Hard-line eurosceptics, on the other hand, viewed sovereignty as indivisible and insisted
that the only way to regain it was to withdraw from the EU.
○ This was a key theme of the 2016 Brexit campaign, which used the slogan ‘take
back control’.
How Brexit has regained Parliamentary Sovereignty
● Since the UK formally withdrew from the European Union in 2020 following the passage of
the Withdrawal Agreement, the legal sovereignty that was held by the EU has arguably
been restored to Parliament.
Devolution
● Devolution, introduced by Labour following the 1997 election, transferred the authority to
make the law on certain subjects to bodies other than the UK Parliament.
○ The Scottish Parliament and Northern Irish Parliament in particular gained primary
legislative control over many key areas including health and education, whilst the
Welsh Parliament gained the same powers in the 2010s.
○ The Greater London Authority and other city regions in England have also gained
significant administrative control.
● Since the Wales Act 2014 and the Scotland Act 2016, both countries have the power to
vary taxation.
● Devolution can therefore be seen as having reduced parliamentary sovereignty.
🗳 The Use Of Referendums 🗳
● In the past few decades, there have been a number of referendums on key constitutional
issues, including Scottish Independence, Brexit, the electoral system and devolution.
○ As a consequence, a convention has developed that the people should be
consulted in a referendum before a significant constitutional change is introduced.
● Though referendums are theoretically advisory and not binding on Parliament, the use of
referendums arguably challenges parliamentary sovereignty as they are very unlikely to
defy the clearly expressed will of the people and now require the consent of the people in a
referendum before legislating for any major constitutional changes.
○ Parliamentary sovereignty has therefore been transferred to popular sovereignty
with regard to key constitutional changes.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 5
The Human Rights Act and Supreme Court
● The Human Rights Act 1998 gave the judiciary the power to rule on whether subsequent
laws were compatible with it and to issue declarations of incompatibility to try and persuade
Parliament to change the offending statute if not.
○ This can be seen as limiting the sovereignty of parliament to pass laws on any
subject they wish.
○ On the other hand, Parliament can ignore the Supreme Court’s declarations of
incompatibility whilst Parliament could remove/replace the Human Rights Act with a
simple majority.
● The creation of the Supreme Court through the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 can also be
seen as challenging parliamentary sovereignty as it moved the UK’s highest court out of the
House of Lords,
○ This increased judicial independence was designed to make the Supreme Court an
effective check on Parliament and the Government.
■ This can be seen in the 2019 Prorogation of Parliament case.
○ On the other hand, the Supreme Court could theoretically be abolished by an Act of
Parliament, whilst the Supreme Court has no powers to strike down laws passed by
Parliament, it simply implements them.
❓ Where Does Sovereignty Now Lie In The UK❓
The Executive
● It can be argued that parliamentary sovereignty is really executive sovereignty as the
government can usually dominate parliament. Lord Hailsham called this an ‘elective
dictatorship’.
○ The executive controls most of the parliamentary agenda and is able to use
whipping and its large majority to ensure they very rarely lose votes.
■ Tony Blair lost just four votes across his ten years as Prime Minister, whilst
since the Second World War, over 99% of divisions (votes) in the House of
Commons have been won by the government.
○ On the other hand, the executive is able to exert much less control over Parliament
when it has a smaller majority or is a coalition/minority government, as was the case
with Theresa May, for example.
The People
● The people ultimately have political sovereignty, with which they grant Parliament and other
bodies legal sovereignty through elections.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 6
● Since the increased use of referendums, it can also be argued that the people now have
legal sovereignty over key constitutional changes, as it would be highly politically unlikely
that Parliament would ignore a referendum result and it has become a convention for
referendums to be held on key constitutional changes.
Devolved Bodies
Ways In Which Devolved Bodies Can Be Argued To Have Significant Sovereignty
● Devolved bodies have significant powers to make laws on a range of policy areas, including
over certain areas of taxation, and therefore have a significant amount of sovereignty.
● Further, the Sewel Convention, which stipulates that parliament cannot legislate on
devolved areas without permission from the relevant devolved assembly, was recognised in
the Scotland Act 2016 and Wales Act 2017.
● Though the UK Parliament theoretically could legally reverse devolution without a
referendum and technically still can pass legislation on devolved matters, as the above acts
only recognise the Sewel Convention, these actions would be politically highly unlikely as it
would create a constitutional crisis and devolved bodies are a deeply ingrained part of
British politics.
○ In practice, therefore, the sovereignty of the UK Parliament can be argued to have
been reduced.
Shared Prosperity Fund Changed Due To Devolved Bodies’ Objections:
● In 2020, the UK Government aimed to introduce a ‘Shared Prosperity Fund’, a replacement
for EU structural funding after Brexit. It planned to administer the fund centrally, bypassing
the devolved governments in Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland.
○ However, there were strong objections from the devolved administrations in Wales
and Scotland, which withheld consent. They argued that bypassing them
contradicted the principles of devolution and their role in regional development.
○ As a result of this pressure and negotiations, the UK Government ultimately agreed
to a compromise, giving the devolved governments greater influence over how the
funds would be allocated and managed within their regions.
● In 2022, after extended discussions and negotiations, the UK Government released its final
guidance for the fund. While the framework still maintained significant control at the UK
level, it involved the devolved administrations in the allocation and strategic direction of the
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 7
Shared Prosperity Fund. This compromise reflected a partial reversal from the initial plan to
centralise all funding decisions at Westminster.
● This shows how the Sewel Convention can result in the devolved bodies being listened to
and policy being changed, supporting the view that the UK Parliament isn’t completely
sovereign in relation to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
Ways In Which Devolved Bodies Can Be Argued To Have Limited Sovereignty
● Devolution isn’t a federal settlement with a formal, legal sharing of sovereignty between
different levels of government. Instead, Parliament has granted power to the devolved
bodies, which it could legally take back.
○ Parliament could theoretically and legally abolish the devolved bodies and reverse
devolution.
○ Further, the Sewel Convention is just a convention, which isn’t legally binding and
doesn’t formally limit the power of Parliament.
● The following recent examples show that the sovereignty of the devolved bodies is limited
by the UK Parliament.
○ The Supreme Court ruled in 2022 that the consent of the UK Parliament is
necessary to legislate for a second independence referendum in Scotland, despite
the SNP arguing otherwise.
○ In January 2023, Rishi Sunak used a Section 35 Order for the first time to block
Scotland’s proposed gender reform bill, which would’ve introduced self-identification
for those who wanted to change gender and allowed 16 and 17 year olds to do so.
■ Section 35 of the Scotland Act allows the UK Government to block a bill from
a devolved body in exceptional circumstances if it believes it will have an
adverse impact on UK-wide law.
Strikes (Minimum Service Levels) Act 2023 Passed Despite Devolved Bodies Witholding
Consent:
● The Sewel Convention holds that the UK Parliament shouldn’t legislate on devolved areas
for the whole of the UK without a consent motion from the devolved bodies.
● Despite the law relating to public services, which are devolved, and the Scottish and Welsh
Parliaments withholding their consent, the UK Parliament passed the Strikes (Minimum
Service Levels) Act 2023.
○ The devolved governments, particularly in Scotland and Wales, opposed the act,
viewing it as an infringement on their rights to manage public services and industrial
relations, whilst arguing that it undermines workers' rights.
○ The UK government proceeded with the legislation, citing the need for continuity of
critical public services, such as health, transport, and education, to protect public
welfare.
● This shows a continued trend of the Sewel Convention being broken. This also happened
with a number of important laws related to Brexit, including the Withdrawal Agreement that
was objected to by all 3 devolved parliaments and the Internal Market Act 2020, that aimed
to improve free trade within the UK, but for which consent was witheld by the Sennedd and
Scottish Parliament.
○ This therefore supports the view that the UK Parliament is still sovereign.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 8
The Judiciary
● Following the passage of the Human Rights Act 1998 and the establishing of the Supreme
Court by the Constitutional Reform Act 2005, the Supreme Court has some sovereignty in
relation to the interpreting and ensuring the implementation of rights in the UK.
○ This sovereignty is very limited, however, as the Human Rights Act and declarations
of incompatibility aren’t binding on Parliament, both the Human Rights Act and
Supreme Court could be removed/replaced by Parliament at any time, whilst the
judiciary has no power to strike down laws passed by the UK Parliament.
The Safety Of Rwanda Act As An Example Of Parliamentary Sovereignty:
● The government passed The Safety of Rwanda (Asylum and Immigration) Act in April 2024.
The act states that Rwanda must be considered a safe country for asylum seekers and that
international law must be put aside to allow for the deportation of asylum seekers to
Rwanda, therefore removing the individual right to judicial review on these grounds.
○ As with the Illegal Migration Act, it was introduced with a section 19 note stating that
the bill is not compatible with the Human Rights Act/European Convention On
Human Rights, but it would like to proceed anyway.
● It also gives ministers the power to ignore emergency rulings against the act by the
European Court Of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
● This shows how Parliament is sovereign as it can make or unmake any law and can
prevent judicial review of particular bits of legislation.
🏛 Parliament 🏛
The Ways In Which Parliament Can Still Be Seen As Sovereign
● The UK Parliament remains the ultimate legal authority in the UK. It can pass laws on any
subject and isn’t subordinate to any other body in law.
○ Judges can’t strike down laws using the Human Rights Act, just declare
incompatibility.
● Parliament retains the legal power to abolish devolved bodies in component parts of the
UK. It can be seen as having transferred powers and functions to the devolved bodies, but
not sovereignty.
● The Article 50 Court case confirmed that the UK Parliament remains sovereign, even after
a referendum.
○ The case also ruled that the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish Parliaments had no
rights to veto an Act of Parliament giving consent to Article 50.
● Though the executive does often have a lot of power, this is due to its large majority in
Parliament and therefore shouldn’t be seen as contradicting parliamentary sovereignty.
○ Further, when the government doesn’t have a large majority, Parliament is effective
in holding the government to account.
How Parliament Sovereignty Has Been Reasserted Recently
● The UK’s withdrawal from the EU in 2020 significantly increased parliamentary sovereignty.
● In recent decades, it has become a convention that parliament is consulted before voting
on major military actions.
● When governments have been weak, especially Theresa May’s government, parliament
has been effective in challenging the executive.
○ Further, since the House of Lords has become more professional following New
Labour’s reforms, it has been readier to challenge government legislation.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 9
● On 7th March 2023, Home Secretary Suella Braverman introduced the Illegal Immigration
Bill with a section 19 note stating that there was a likelihood the provisions of the bill would
be incompatible with the Human Rights Act and international law (The European
Convention on Human Rights), but that the government wanted to proceed with it
nonetheless.
○ This shows the increasingly limited influence of the Supreme Court’s declarations of
incompatibility with the Human Rights Act.
● The Supreme Court 2022 ruling that set out it the UK Parliament’s consent was necessary
to call a second Scottish Independence Referendum, as well as Sunak’s Section 35 Order
represents a reassertion of parliamentary sovereignty in relation to devolved bodies.
The Safety Of Rwanda Act As An Example Of Parliamentary Sovereignty:
● The government passed The Safety of Rwanda (Asylum and Immigration) Act in April 2024.
The act states that Rwanda must be considered a safe country for asylum seekers and that
international law must be put aside to allow for the deportation of asylum seekers to
Rwanda, therefore removing the individual right to judicial review on these grounds.
○ As with the Illegal Migration Act, it was introduced with a section 19 note stating that
the bill is not compatible with the Human Rights Act/European Convention On
Human Rights, but it would like to proceed anyway.
● It also gives ministers the power to ignore emergency rulings against the act by the
European Court Of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
● This shows how Parliament is sovereign as it can make or unmake any law and can
prevent judicial review of particular bits of legislation.
Overall Analysis Of Sovereignty In The UK
● The people hold political sovereignty in the UK and grant legal sovereignty to other bodies.
● Parliament holds the majority of legal sovereignty in the UK, especially following the
withdrawal of the UK from the EU.
○ The executive exercises most of this sovereignty in practice, especially when it has
a large majority in parliament.
● Devolved bodies are largely sovereign when it comes to decisions that only affect Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland.
● The people have legal sovereignty over key constitutional changes.
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A
Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 10
