Unitary State - :: a highly centralised state in which sovereignty and political power is concentrated at the centre and central government has ultimate authority over sub-national institutions - all areas of the state are governed in the same way and there is a very high degree of administrative standardisation

Union State :: a state whose component parts have come together through a union of crowns or by treaty and in which there is a high degree of administrative standardisation, but the component nations retain some of their pre-union features, e.g. separate churches or legal system

Federal State :: a state in which the constitution divides decision-making authority between national (federal) and regional (state) tiers of government and the different tiers of government are protected by the constitution, i.e. one tier cannot abolish the other the transfer of political power from central government to sub-national government

Devolution - :: The dispersal of power, but not sovereignty, within a political system

Federalism :: the sharing of power, enshrined in a constitution, between national and regional authorities. Legal and political structures where power is distributed between two distinct levels of government on the basis that neither is subordinate to the other.

Administrative Devolution :: in which political power is concentrated at the centre, but special arrangements are made to allow distinctive regional interests and identities to organise activity in a way that suits them

Legislative devolution :: in which regions have their own parliaments and legislative powers in certain fields

Primary legislative powers :: Refers to the main laws passed by the legislative bodies of the UK, such as Acts of the UK Parliament, Scottish Parliament, Welsh Parliament, and Northern Ireland Assembly. It also includes Acts passed by historical parliaments, other primary legislation for Northern Ireland, and Church of England Measures.

Secondary legislative powers :: Law created by ministers or other bodies under powers already given to them by an Act of Parliament. It is used to fill in the details of Acts (primary legislation) and provide practical measures that enable the law to operate in daily life, e.g. to set the date for when provisions of an Act will come into effect as law, or to amend existing laws within the boundaries of the existing primary legislation (e.g. adding a banned dog breed to the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991. Examples of include UK Statutory Instruments, Wales Statutory Instruments, Scottish Statutory Instruments, and Northern Ireland Statutory Rules.

Nation :: a group of people who inhabit an historic territory, share common traditions and culture, and regard themselves as a distinctive political community. They may also share a common language or religion

Nationalism :: a political ideology or movement that regards the nation as the main form of political community, believes that humanity is divided into distinctive nations and that nations should be self-governing

Intergovernmental relations :: relations between the UK government and devolved administrations

West Lothian Question :: Why should Scottish MPs be able to vote on English matters at Westminster when English MPs cannot vote on matters devolved to the Scottish Parliament?

Direct Rule :: the government of Northern Ireland from London, through special procedures at Westminster

Loyalist :: an adherent to a variant of unionism that has supported the use of political violence to defend the union between Great Britain and Northern Ireland

Republican :: a political position in Northern Ireland that supports constitutional means of achieving improved rights for Catholics, and the eventual incorporation of the six counties of Northern Ireland into the Republic of Ireland
