5 The Tempest 

Answer both parts (a) and (b). 
5 (a) Discuss the following passage from Act 3 Scene 3, exploring Shakespeare's use of language and dramatic effects. [15] 

ALONSO 	I will stand to, and feed,                                                                     Although my last; no matter, since I feel                                                                   The best is past. Brother, my lord the Duke,                                                             Stand to, and do as we. 
Thunder and lightning. Enter ARIEL, like a harpy; claps his wings upon the table; 5               and, with a quaint device, the banquet vanishes. 
ARIEL You are three men of sin, whom Destiny,                                                That hath to instrument this lower world                                                              And what is in't, the never-surfeited sea                                                                   Hath caused to belch up you; and on this island 					10                                                      Where man doth not inhabit-you 'mongst men                                                     Being most unfit to live. I have made you mad;                                                            And even with such-like valour men hang and drown                                                  Their proper selves. 
[ALONSO, SEBASTIAN etc., draw their swords.]					15 
                               You fools! I and my fellows                                                           Are ministers of Fate: the elements                                                                                Of whom your swords are temper'd may as well                                                     Wound the loud winds, or with bemock'd-at stabs                                                         Kill the still-closing waters, as diminish                                 			20                                       One dowle that's in my plume; my fellow-ministers                                                      Are like invulnerable. If you could hurt,                                                               Your swords are now too massy for your strengths                                                         And will not be uplifted. But remember-                                                                 For that's my business to you-that you three 					25                                                             From Milan did supplant good Prospero;                                                             Exposed unto the sea, which hath requit it,                                                           Him, and his innocent child; for which foul deed                                                        The pow'rs, delaying, not forgetting, have                                                                Incens'd the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures, 					30                                                  Against your peace. Thee of thy son, Alonso,                                                               They have bereft; and do pronounce by me                                                                 Ling'ring perdition, worse than any death                                                               Can be at once, shall step by step attend                                                                    You and your ways; whose wraths to guard you from-       			35                                    Which here, in this most desolate isle, else falls                                                        Upon your heads-is nothing but heart's sorrow,                                                       And a clear life ensuing.
He vanishes in thunder; then, to soft music, enter the Shapes again, and dance, with                     mocks and mows, and carrying out the table. 							40
PROSPERO Bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou                                              Perform'd, my Ariel; a grace it had, devouring.                                                               Of my instruction hast thou nothing bated                                                                     In what thou hadst to say; so, with good life                                                              And observation strange, my meaner ministers 					45                                                             Their several kinds have done. My high charms work,                                        And these mine enemies are all knit up                                                                        In their distractions. They now are in my pow'r;                                                           And in these fits I leave them, while I visit                                                               Young Ferdinand, whom they suppose is drown'd,  					50                                                  And his and mine lov'd darling. 
[Exit above.] 
GONZALO I' th' name of something holy, sir, why stand you                                              In this strange stare? 
ALONSO                O, it is monstrous, monstrous!     				55                                                       Methought the billows spoke, and told me of it;                                                     The winds did sing it to me; and the thunder,                                                             That deep and dreadful organ-pipe, pronounc'd                                                            The name of Prosper; it did bass my trespass.                                                         Therefore my son i' th' ooze is bedded; and   						60                                                              I'll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded,                                                        And with him there lie mudded. 	[Exit.]
SEBASTIAN But one fiend at a time, I'll fight their legions o'er.
ANTONIO I'll be thy second. [Exeunt SEBASTIAN, and ANTONIO.]
																					
     ...They now are in my pow'r...
     (The Tempest, III.iii.48)

This scene constitutes a kind of dramatic climax in the play's action[AM1]: [AM2]finally, Prospero's ambitions seem to be realised and he appears to be in complete control of the world around him. Raising the tempest at the start of the play seems to have worked out beautifully and, as he says later, "At this hour/Lie at my mercy all mine enemies...". It is with a shock, then, that we realise that we are only in Act 3: there are just over two Acts of the play still to go and it is this lack of dramatic jeopardy that gives this play its distinctive tone. [AM3](The action of the play is, after all, "stage managed" by Prospero throughout - an idea that reaches its culmination in Peter Greenaway's Prospero's Books[AM4], where the lines of the characters are spoken aloud by Prospero, too.) But the sense of enormous power that is communicated in this scene - the thunder, lightning and Ariel's harpy impersonation - come together with terrifying effect at this point in the play (the dramatic power that can be experienced in the theatre in this scene was communicated particularly effectively in Greg Doran's 2016 RSC production, which employed the latest live-motion-capture technology to immerse the audience in the experience that so terrifies the Italian noblemen)[AM5] - in a wholly successful production of The Tempest, I think that the audience should be as entranced and awe-struck by Prospero's magic as the characters on stage at this juncture.

Yet any stage effect is limited in its duration and one of the most notable aspects of this scene is how unmoved Antonio and Sebastian are by the extraordinary scene that they have just witnessed. Having initially taken arms against the harpy in an act of profound futility, they now have to place their weapons aside as their

     ...swords are now too massy for [their] strengths                                                         And will not be uplifted...   
     	(The Tempest, III.iii.63-64)
     

but at the end of this extract, the pair seem ready once again to offer resistance to the spirits that Prospero has summoned:

	SEBASTIAN But one fiend at a time, I'll fight their legions o'er.
     ANTONIO I'll be thy second.    
     (The Tempest, III.iii.23-24)

This resistance to the vision inspired by Prospero's magic sets Antonio and Sebastian apart from Alonso, the King of Naples, for whom the appearance of Ariel seems to have been completely devastating. One cannot help seeing the pair's resolute determination not to be moved by the harpy's appearance as mapping directly onto Antonio and Sebastian's stubborn refusal to respond to Prospero's clemency at the end of the play. The deflationary, cynical rhetoric of Antonio and Sebastian in the play reveals their ethical emptiness[AM6]. Even when faced by an astonishing act of magnanimity and kindness at the end of the play -

PROSPERO For you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother
Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive
Thy rankest fault; all of them...  
     (The Tempest, V.i.130-132)

- Antonio and Sebastian stand mute. Many of the play's critics have seen this as allying with the way in which there are always going to be "men of sin" (III.iii.7) who are tone deaf when hearing the Christian message which has Christ's infinite mercy at its heart. 

While Alonso's ability to be moved by the spectacle presented in this scene will be rewarded with the restoration of his Kingdom and, miraculously, the return of his son from what must have seemed certain death, Antonio and Sebastian will end the play as they began it: their final lines in the play 

SEBASTIAN                       ...Ha, ha!
What things are these, my lord Antonio?
Will money buy 'em?
ANTONIO                  Very like; one of them
Is a plain fish, and, no doubt, marketable.
     (The Tempest, V.i.130-132)

are saturated in the cynicism and the world weariness that has characterized their utterances throughout the text. It would seem that these two characters' refusal to experience change is the real "...Ling'ring perdition, worse than any death..." (III.iii.33) referred to by Ariel in his speech in this passage.[AM7]

676 words
												

(b) 'Punishment is a key element in the play.' 
Using your knowledge of the play as a whole, show how far you agree with this view of The Tempest. 
Remember to support your answer with reference to different interpretations. [15]
												

Punishment seems to be everywhere in The Tempest. [AM8]It is, after all, to punish those who have have usurped him that Prospero raises the storm that opens the play. When we first see Prospero interact with his servants, Caliban and Ariel, the instinct to punish[AM9] seems uppermost in his mind. When Ariel suggests that his contract with his master may be at an end, Prospero's fury is evident:

PROSPERO ...If thou more murmur'st, I will rend an oak
And peg thee in his knotty entrails till
Thou hast howl'd away twelve winters...
     (The Tempest, I.ii.294-296)

Prospero's threats toward Caliban are even more chilling, as they seem to evoke the terrible behaviour of slave-owners towards those that they claimed to own:

PROSPERO ...Thou most lying slave,
Whom stripes may move, not kindness!..
     (The Tempest, I.ii.346-347)

This aspect of the play has, inevitably, caught the attention of those critics and directors [AM10]who have tended to see the play from a post-colonial perspective: Shakespeare seems to anticipate the worst excesses of the trans-Atlantic slave trade in these exchanges in Act 1, Scene 2. The casting of actors of colour as Caliban inevitably prompt this reading of the play - Djimon Hounsou's performance in Julie Taymor's 2010 film immediately comes to mind, but such approaches have been popular on the English stage ever since Jonathan Miller cast Black actors as Ariel and Caliban in the Mermaid Theatre production of the play in 1970 after reading Octave Mannoni's Prospero and Caliban: The Psychology of Colonization (1956).[AM11]

Yet seeing the play in such terms tends to obscure just how limited in scope Prospero's punishments are in The Tempest[AM12]: he is quick to reassure Miranda (and the audience beyond) that "There's no harm done" (I.ii.15) in the storm that opens the play. Indeed, the waters that seem, initially, to have drowned the mariners and the noblemen have, far from harming them, appear instead to have cleansed them. Gonzalo, who is at the moral heart of this play, reminds his fellow travellers that their "...escape/Is much beyond [their] loss..." (II.i.2-3); it is likely that Shakespeare's audience would be reminded of the sacrament of baptism when Gonzalo speaks of the effect that the tempest had on the noblemen's clothing:

...our garments, being, as they were, drenched in the sea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with salt water...
     (The Tempest, II.i.59-61)

Miraculously, the storm - far from causing harm - has, in fact, led to a kind of renewal for the noblemen's clothing and it is tempting to see this as acting as a symbol for the spiritual renewal or benediction that is available for those who are able to see the island as an enchanted place. While post-colonial readings of the play have alerted us to Prospero's capacity for terrible violence, when we actually consider our experience of the play in the theatre[AM13], we recognize that his threats against his subordinates remain just that - threats. Prospero's violence is, in fact, performative, rhetorical, linguistic. It is worth considering how different the atmosphere of this play would be if we actually witnessed the "cramps [and]/Side-stitches that...pen [up the] breath" (I.ii.327-328) of Caliban. Seeing these punishments would immediately catapult the play into the realm of Tragedy (we immediately think of the terrible violence we witness in Macbeth and King Lear). The play often works most successfully in the theatre when the actor playing Prospero seems an individual who, quick to anger, is nonetheless one whose "bark is worse than his bite." (Roger Allam, totally unable to control the feisty Jessie Buckley as Miranda, played the character in this manner at the Globe in 2013.)  [AM14]

The key moment in the play, of course, comes when Prospero's urge to punish those who trespassed against him gives way to mercy. 

ARIEL	...Your charm so strongly works 'em
That if you now beheld them, your affections
Would become tender.
   PROSPERO                Dost thou think so, spirit?
   ARIEL Mine would, sir, were I human.
   PROSPERO                                         And mine shall.
   (The Tempest, V.i.17-20)[AM15]

It seems that with these final three stressed monosyllables the world of the play is transformed and Tragedy is avoided: the revenge theme that has dominated the play's action is replaced with a sense of redemption. It is implied that, while punishment has little effect on the individual - Caliban may be superficially compliant after Prospero's blood-curdling threats in Act 1, Scene 2, but he heads off at the end of the scene in the perfect frame of mind to rebel against his rule - forgiveness can be utterly transformative. It is tempting to see punishment as having the same role in the play as it does in the narrative of the New Testament - it is a stage that must be gone through before Mercy prevails. [AM16]

791 words					
												

Section 2 - Drama and Poetry pre-1900 
Answer one question from this section. 
You should spend about 1 hour and 15 minutes on this section. 
In your answer, you should refer to one drama text and one poetry text from the following lists: 

DramaPoetryChristopher Marlowe: Edward II
John Webster: The Duchess of Malfi 
Oliver Goldsmith: She Stoops to Conquer Henrik Ibsen: A Doll's House 
Oscar Wilde: An Ideal Husband
Geoffrey Chaucer: The Merchant's Prologue and Tale 
John Milton: Paradise Lost Books 9 & 10 Samuel Taylor Coleridge: Selected Poems Alfred, Lord Tennyson: Maud 
Christina Rossetti: Selected Poems
9 'Powerful emotions are often the excuse for unacceptable behaviour.' 
In the light of this view, consider ways in which writers explore the connection between intense thoughts and bad deeds. 
In your answer, compare one drama text and one poetry text from the above lists. [30]

Ferdinand's outburst on hearing of his sister's marriage is an obvious place to begin this consideration of "powerful emotion[ ]" and its influence on terrible moral behaviour in Webster's Jacobean Tragedy The Duchess of Malfi (1614) and John Milton's Christian Epic Paradise Lost (1667). [AM17]When Ferdinand, The Duke of Calabria[AM18], hears that his sister the eponymous Duchess of Malfi has married in secret and has subsequently had children his reaction is terrifying: 

FERDINAND: ...I would have their bodies [i.e. the bodies of the Duchess's children]
Burnt in a coal-pit with the ventage stopped...
Or dip the sheets they lie in in pitch or sulphur,
Wrap them in't, and then light them like a match...
(The Duchess of Malfi, II.v.66-70)[AM19]

"Unacceptable" seems a mild word to describe Ferdinand's totally unhinged behaviour at this point in the play. The diabolical note that one hears in this scene links Ferdinand with Milton's Satan whose default mode often seems to be the self-pitying, intemperate tirade. [AM20]Here is Satan responding to the beauties of Eden in Book 9:

With what delight could I have walked thee round,
If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange 
Of hill, and valley, rivers, woods and plains...
                          ...but I in none of these
Find place or refuge; and the more I see
Pleasures about me, so much more I feel 
Torment within me, as from the hateful siege
Of contraries; all good to me becomes
Bane...
(Paradise Lost, IX.114-123) 

These two speeches seem linked [AM21]by the speakers' lack of self-knowledge: Ferdinand seems unaware that his world-transforming hatred for his sister and her family is prompted by his own unacknowledged incestuous feeling for his twin sibling while Satan seems totally unaware that his own terrible predicament is the direct result of his own steadfast refusal to obey God's will ("...Better to reign in hell, than serve in heaven..." I.263). C.S. Lewis has pointed out the foolishness in Satan's refusal to accept his subordinate role to God, drawing our attention to the fact that "the Satanic predicament consists in...Satan viewing himself as suffering from a 'sense of injured merit' (I.98)..." This resentment is, Lewis points out, totally baseless and without foundation, emerging naturally out of Satan's temperament - Satan is incapable of "intense thought[ ]" but is, rather, a victim of his own "powerful feeling[ ]" of having his intrinsic merit overlooked by a tyrannical God. Lewis views Blake and Shelley as credulous dupes who have taken Satan's pathetic self-pity ("...With what delight could I have walked thee round...") at face value. If one accepts such a reading of Satan's character, the connection with Ferdinand, the Duke of Calabria, is an obvious one: it is, after all,  hardly reasonable to assume that the Duchess would reciprocate her brother's sexual feelings for her (such a scenario would have to wait for John Ford's 'Tis Pity She's a Whore in 1630) so his outrage at her remarriage is simply a function of his crazed narcissism.[AM22]

Satan's behaviour being prompted by an irrational "sense of injured merit" (I.98) links the character neatly with that other Malcontent, Bosola. From the moment he sets foot onstage, the latter is the source of a whole host of complaints - the world has, it seems, failed to recognize Bosola's peculiar gifts:

Bosola. 		...I have done you
Better service than to be slighted thus.
(The Duchess of Malfi, I.i.29-30)

In a sense, Bosola's resentment - his sense of injured pride - can be seen as the motive force of the play (just as Satan's sense of injured pride can be seen as initiating the action that prompts the plot of Paradise Lost). In both cases, I think, the reader (or viewer) recognizes that the characters' righteous fury is misplaced, disproportionate and absurd. Satan and Bosola's dedication to "unacceptable behaviour" seems complete and unconditional - the former cannot bear even to behold goodness ("...all good to me becomes/Bane...") while the latter is responsible for the most shocking moment in The Duchess of Malfi, announcing casually "Some other strangle the children" in Act 4, Scene 2.     
 
It can be argued that the most catastrophic moment in human history[AM23], The Fall, takes place because of both an overwhelming outburst of strong emotion and through a failure of the human intellect, wrongheaded thinking. If Adam eats the apple because of powerful feeling for his partner (feelings that would be identified by Milton's readers as an example of the medieval sin of uxoriousness), Eve falls because she is intellectually seduced by Satan, believing his manifest lies because they flatter her vanity. Satan is keen to present Eve herself as an underappreciated deity, depicting Eden as a backwater unworthy to contain such a "celestial beauty" (IX.540):

Who sees thee? (and what is one?) who shouldst be seen
A Goddess among Gods, adored and served
By angels numberless...
(Paradise Lost, IX.546-548) 

So Satan successfully replicates in Eve the "sense of injured merit" that was identified by Lewis as the defining feature of his own character. The equivalent scene in The Duchess of Malfi sees the eponymous character resist the empty blandishments of Bosola, who tries to convince her that life is essentially an empty, nihilistic experience:

Bosola.  ...Thou art a box of worm-seed - at best, but a salvatory of green mummy. What's this flesh? A little crudded milk fantastical puff-paste... 
(The Duchess of Malfi, IV.ii.120-121)

At this point in the play we can see that "powerful emotion" can lead to actions that would be regarded as profoundly moral by Webster's audience[AM24]: the Duchess's resistance to Bosola's worldview is founded on her powerful religious belief:

     BOSOLA: Doth not death fright you?
DUCHESS: Who would be afraid on't,
Knowing to meet such excellent company
In th' other world?
(The Duchess of Malfi, IV.ii.120-121)

The corresponding scene in Paradise Lost sees the first human couple fall to their knees, abject before God's power. As Adam and Eve cry for mercy, we recognize that Milton's purpose in his Christian Epic is to "justify the ways of God to men" (I.26). 

     ...with their sighs the air
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek. 
	(Paradise Lost, X.1102-1104)

Both writers, Webster and Milton, however different their original purposes, and however distinct the effects achieved within their works, save their most "powerful emotions" for the affirmation of the Christian message - those who commit "bad deeds" are wholly destroyed and those who live according to the tenets of Christianity are, ultimately, rewarded. [AM25]

1069 words


	



     . 


     oo   
  

[AM1]I think that where you choose to begin the (a) response is really important. It should be a moment that is central in thematic terms to the passage.
I chose to begin with "They now are in my pow'r..." because this has clearly been Prospero's ambition since the start of the play: his decision to summon up the tempest is prompted by his desire to bring about this moment when his enemies are completely in his power.  
[AM2]It is worth noting that I wrote this essay's three topic sentences...

This scene constitutes a kind of dramatic climax in the play's action.

Any stage effect is limited in its duration and one of the most notable aspects of this scene is how unmoved Antonio and Sebastian are by the extraordinary scene that they have just witnessed. 

While Alonso's ability to be moved by the spectacle presented in this scene will be rewarded with the restoration of his Kingdom and, miraculously, the return of his son from what must have seemed certain death, Antonio and Sebastian will end the play as they began it.

...before I started writing the essay.

This process of writing the first sentence of each section of the essay - along with the annotation of the passage - is time consuming, but it means that the actual writing process goes much more swiftly as I'm not thinking and writing at the same time. (I know what I want to write and I simply focus on getting the words right.) I also know where I intend to finish the essay as I have planned my conclusion in advance. 

[AM3]My advice to you from the outset with these questions is that you begin by contextualizing the passage. I have departed from this advice in this one a little, but I think that these two sentences are my attempt to suggest how this passage fits into the play as a whole.
[AM4]Any relevant, argument-enhancing reference to specific productions will be rewarded with an AO2 tick in the (a) response, an AO5 tick in the (b) answer.
[AM5]Obviously, one of the ways in which you might illustrate the requirement to discuss "dramatic effects" in the passage is to describe the way in which the specific scene was realised by a particular director in the theatre. 
[AM6]This, I think, is the only point in the essay that I refer to "Shakespeare's use of language" in the answer - the focus is largely on dramatic effects, but this is fine. There will, after all, be other full mark responses where the emphasis is on the linguistic features of the passage rather than the dramatic effect of the extract. 

As to illustrating Antonio and Sebastian's "deflationary, cynical rhetoric" almost any line they utter would do:

Adrian. The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.
Sebastian. As if it had lungs and rotten ones.
Antonio. Or as 'twere perfumed by a fen.
    
[AM7]Note the sense of "closure" that is achieved at the end of the response: I have managed to achieve this without summarising everything that I have written in the response. (Such "conclusions" are odd: they seem to be premised on the idea that the reader has not been paying attention or is an amnesiac who needs to be reminded of what they had read moments earlier.)  
[AM8]Again, it is worth noting the three topic sentences for this response, which I wrote at the planning stage...

Punishment seems to be everywhere in The Tempest. 

Yet seeing the play in such terms tends to obscure just how limited in scope Prospero's punishments are in The Tempest.

The key moment in the play, of course, comes when Prospero's urge to punish those who trespassed against him gives way to mercy. 

 
[AM9]Note the repetition of the word "punishment", and its cognate words ("punish", "punishing", "punitive") throughout the essay. I am referring explicitly to the terms of the question throughout the response because every examiner is on the alert for irrelevant material in your writing - pre-planned answers tend to heavily penalised during the assessment process as they tend to move off topic on a regular basis.
[AM10]My use of the phrase "critics and directors" immediately alerts the examiner to the fact that I am aware that I have to illustrate AO5 in the (b) response: 

The candidate must be able to "Explore literary texts informed by different interpretations."
[AM11]Reference to specific productions will be rewarded under AO5 as every directorial decision constitutes a reading of the text being performed.
[AM12]This is the key idea in the essay, I think. It would be rewarded under AO5 (personal opinion/individual reading). 
[AM13]It is worth memorizing and using this formulation for the examination: try to give a sense that you are discussing a play throughout.
[AM14]Note, again, the reference to a specific production.
[AM15]A lengthy quotation, I know, but I think that the full exchange is required if the argument is to be clear...
[AM16]Again, there is a sense of "closure", I think, without the hackneyed, self-defeating tactic of summarizing what has already been written.
[AM17]The key features of your opening sentence in the Section 2 essay is that it should 
name both texts
provide the dates of the first performance or publication of the texts
establish the fact that you know the genre of the texts (Jacobean Tragedy/Christian Epic)
refer to the key terms in the essay
involve reference to comparison.

This opening sentence fulfils all of these criteria (though it only exemplifies "powerful emotion" and its influence on "bad deeds" in one text).
  
[AM18]There is a little examination trick at work here: the first time you refer to Ferdinand, refer to him as the Duke of Calabria, thus assuring the examiner that you know this fact. 

You can do the same with

"...Satan, 'the enemy of mankind' (IX.494),..."

"...the Duchess of Malfi, the eponymous character in the play,..."

"...Bosola, the Malcontent,..."

"...the Cardinal, who would have been a bogeyman figure for Webster's Protestant 17th century audience,..." 
[AM19]This and the next quotation are relatively lengthy and, while it is a useful "rule of thumb" that you should employ short quotations in your essay, it is certainly the case that I make full use of these two quotations in the rest of the essay. 

Obviously, there will be a lot to commit to memory for the final summer examinations - key quotations from the set texts, critical quotations and references to key productions - but you have to approach this process as if you were learning your lines for a play, I think. Length of quotation is partly, of course, defined by what you can remember in the exam. [I'm afraid you are going to have to memorize line breaks, too, when quoting poetry!]    
[AM20]"Compare" is a key word in the Section 2 questions (and is assessed under AO4), and, ideally, your topic sentences should contain the language of comparative discourse ("similarly"; "conversely"; "...on the one hand...on the other hand..."; "...this moment links neatly to the episode in..." and, above all, the phrase "...both texts..."). 

Here are the three topic sentences for this essay (again, they were written as part of the planning process)...

Ferdinand's outburst on hearing of his sister's marriage is an obvious place to begin this consideration of "powerful emotion[ ]" and its influence on terrible moral behaviour in Webster's Jacobean Tragedy The Duchess of Malfi (1614) and John Milton's Christian Epic Paradise Lost (1667). 

Satan's behaviour being prompted by an irrational "sense of injured merit" (I.98) links the character neatly with that other Malcontent, Bosola. 

It can be argued that the most catastrophic moment in human history, The Fall, takes place because of both an overwhelming outburst of strong emotion and through a failure of the human intellect, wrongheaded thinking. 
[AM21]...note the comparison...the word "seems" reveals that this is an interpretative matter.
[AM22]This whole section addresses the requirement to illustrate AO5 

The candidate is required to "Explore literary texts informed by different interpretations" 

in the essay. The references to Lewis, Blake and Shelley reveal knowledge of the critical hinterland of Paradise Lost. 
[AM23]AO3 - the requirement that the candidate "Demonstrate understanding of the significance and influence of the contexts in which literary texts are written and received" - is addressed here (the centrality of The Fall to the early modern period is implied) and in references to "the medieval sin of uxoriousness" and to the first performance of John Ford's 'Tis Pity She's a Whore. 

The essay might be regarded as quite "thin" in contextual references, but OCR mark these essays "holistically" - there is no requirement that half of the essay you should be focused on context (despite appearances to the contrary in the Mark Scheme). The key with contextual material is that it should be integrated into the argument rather than "dropped into" the essay in order to fulfil a requirement that contextual references be included.
[AM24]A moment when the argument develops in quite a surprising manner: the question asked us to look at "ways in which writers explore the connection between intense thoughts and bad deeds" but here I point out that intense feeling can terminate in moral action, too.

This would be rewarded under AO5, with the summative comment adding that this is an essay in which the candidate "is prepared to express their own critical judgements". 
[AM25]...so the essay concludes in comparison ("...Both writers, Webster and Milton..."), with the final words giving a sense of "closure" through a presentation of the Christian theme that unites them both. 
