https://www.gutenberg.org/files/23042/23042-h/23042-h.htm lines 234-304

(a)

We all were sea-swallow'd, though some cast again,
And by that destiny, to perform an act
Whereof what's past is prologue; what to come,
 In yours and my discharge.

During this scene, Antonio attempts to convince Sebastian to perform a similar usurpation to the one Antonio unleashed onto his brother. One of the most compelling ways he attempts this for an early modern audience is by trying to link the idea of Sebastian's rise to fate. Shakespeare uses the word "destiny" here to convey that what Antonio wants is predestined. Predestination was a commonly accepted idea as part of Christian doctrine, and the use of the word "destiny" would have a strong dramatic effect on the early modern mind. Antonio uses the phrase "Whereof what's past is prologue" to further rationalise and justify the idea of Sebastian murdering his brother. The use of the word prologue lends credence to readings of The Tempest that focus on its comments on drama, Antonio essentially saying that if the world was a play, it was leading up to this climax. He effectively builds on his argument of destiny to further convince Sebastian of doing what he wants. By encouraging the idea that their actions are predetermined, he justifies his past actions as just part of a play or a story; it justifies regicide or usurpation as natural events rather than crimes.
Furthermore, Antonio effectively uses rhetorical questions and other devices to further convince Sebastian. At the start of the passage, he asks, "Will you grant with me / That Ferdinand is drown'd?" By using a rhetorical question, he pushes Sebastian into thinking that this is his own idea and the next step in a logical assessment of the situation. He further asks, "Then, tell me, who's the next heir of Naples?" further causing Sebastian to doubt the future of his kingdom. He goes on to negatively speak about the heir, Claribel, labelling her as "ten leagues beyond man's life." The use of the word "man" stresses the sex of Claribel, which would be a concern to an early modern audience or character. Antonio further emphasises the distance Claribel is from Naples. Antonio continuously uses rhetorical questions to try and push Sebastian into believing he is forming his own conclusions about the situation. Antonio further asks, "And how do you content/tender your own good fortune?" He questions whether Sebastian will take the opportunity presented to him as Antonio did when he usurped Prospero. This rhetorical question digs into insecurities potentially faced by Sebastian about his inactivity and being overshadowed by his brother, who simply is more important due to his position. Shakespeare's repeated use of rhetoric and the falling guard of Sebastian convey the effectiveness of Antonio's arguments, and this is a central part of the passage, as it dominates a large part of it. Structurally, it is clearly a central conflict and idea of the passage due to its large scope.

Sebastian Thy case, dear friend,
Shall be my precedent; as thou got'st Milan,
I'll come by Naples. Draw thy sword: one stroke
Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest;
And I the king shall love thee.

While Sebastian very early in the passage seems to resist Antonio's strong rhetoric, he quickly falls to him and is convinced. Here he is convinced by Antonio and even promises to use his "case" as "precedent." This further plays into the idea that both of their cases are just logical conclusions from a turn of events rather than a set of choices made by each character. This structurally mirrors Antonio's argument in the fact that Antonio's actions act as a prologue for Sebastian's; additionally, the argument acts as a prologue for Sebastian's capitulation. This is a cycle of violence and treachery unleashed from Antonio, and Shakespeare uses structure to purposefully draw comparisons between the two acts, with both originating from Antonio. This further draws a divide between the positive nature of Prospero and the darker Antonio. Prospero throughout the play breaks this cycle, whereas Antonio only seeks to reinforce the destructive cycles he has created. Shakespeare effectively uses the structure of the passage and the language of Sebastian to show the destructive and cyclical role Antonio takes in the play, which only reinforces the opposite role Prospero takes.


Re-enter Ariel invisible.
Ari. My master through his art foresees the danger
That you, his friend, are in; and sends me forth,-
For else his project dies,-to keep them living.
[Sings in Gonzalo's ear.]

The appearance of Ariel only further seeks to contrast the two brothers, Antonio and Prospero. Ariel wakes Gonzalo and thus saves his life; she says the reason for her doing this is her "master," who "foresees the danger.". In doing this and sending Ariel Prospero directly, it thwarts the plans of Antonio and Sebastian. The word "dies" both refers to Prospero's "project" throughout the play of restoring his rule and writing injustice, but it also literally refers to Gonzalo's life. Prospero shows mercy by saving someone who sanctioned the usurpation against him, contrasting the wicked scheming of Antonio. Ariel's singing directly into Gonzalo's ear strongly contrasts the hushed and hidden whispering of Antonio and Sebastian. For an audience, this is a strong moment to contrast the motivations and methods of the different parties in the play, even if Prospero is not present. It effectively juxtaposes scheming and crime versus virtue and forgiveness. This moment is particularly dramatised in the 1993 Sam Mendes production, where Simon Russell Beale loudly sings this section in full view of the audience.


(b) 'The Tempest is a play about savagery and its consequences.'  

When discussing savagery in The Tempest, the most obvious first choice to discuss is Caliban. Ralph Crane described him as a "savage and deformed slave" in the dramatis personae of the first folio. This is furthered by Prospero (the protagonist and assumed moral centre of the play), who describes him as a "freckled whelp hag-born-not honor'd with / A human shape" in Act 1 Scene 2. This is clearly Prospero dehumanising Caliban and relegating him to the position of a savage. This link can be upheld by Caliban's behaviour both during and before the play begins. Early in the play, in Act 1, Scene 2, Prospero details how Caliban "didst seek to violate / The honour of my child.". Trying to violate a young 15-year-old girl like this is undoubtedly savage, and the consequences of this are exhibited. Caliban details how "When thou camest first, / Thou strokedst me, and madest much of me." This is the obvious consequence of Caliban's actions against Prospero's daughter, his supposed savagery. He loses the preferential treatment he had once enjoyed upon Prospero's arrival. Additionally, Caliban details how he is denied his rights to this island through his birth here as another consequence of his savage actions. Caliban's savagery is frequently played upon even by modern productions, such as in the 2006 Rupert Goold RSC production. Here John Light played Caliban as a strong wild man in shackles, playing into his savage and criminal nature in the eyes of the audience. Caliban's savagery would be understood by both early modern audiences and modern ones, with both being disturbed by Caliban's advances on Miranda for different reasons. Early modern audiences would see issues with the royal blood of Miranda mixing with Caliban and not a figure like Ferdinand as would later happen in the play, whereas modern audiences would focus further on the autonomy of Miranda. To a modern audience, the suggestion that the violation Caliban made was of Prospero's honour instead of Miranda's would itself be savage.

Despite the initial presumption that Caliban as an uncivilised figure may be the savage during the play's duration, it is often the figures traditionally regarded as civilised who act savagely. Conversely, these characters often do not suffer the same consequences. Caliban does suggest that ultimately class and status affect more the aftereffects of savagery than whether one is savage or not. Prospero subjugates both Caliban and Ariel during his time on the island, and while he frees the latter, he still uses both to do his bidding. In Act 1, Scene 2, Prospero says to Ariel, "If thou more murmur'st, I will rend an oak, / And peg thee in his knotty entrails, till / Thou hast howl'd away twelve winters" here he threatens to torture Ariel by turning her into a knotted-up tree. This is not only savage in and of itself, but it also is clearly not responded to with consequences, as Ariel says, "Pardon, master:" in the next line, showing her acceptance of this behaviour. While this can be seen as equally savage as the threats Caliban would make on Prospero's life, Prospero faces no consequences. Even further, there is more weight behind these threats, as throughout the play, Prospero holds power, whereas figures such as Caliban do not; simply put, these threats are credible. Prospero additionally in this scene denies the concept of primogeniture for Caliban: "This island's mine, by Sycorax my mother, / Which thou takest from me" . This concept would have held much weight to the early modern audiences receiving The Tempest's original productions. For modern readers, this can be seen as a colonial robbing of the lands of a native. Prospero is not the only aristocratic figure to act savagely without facing consequences. Antonio's pre-play betrayal and usurpation of his own brother is savage and cruel. Prospero's extended speeches to his daughter during Act 1 Scene 2 and his larger scheme to right the wrongs done to him show his feeling of betrayal over his brothers' actions. Further, in Act 2, Antonio plots and then colludes with Sebastian to kill Sebastian's brother Alonso. Antonio tells Sebastian that "My strong imagination sees a crown / Dropping upon thy head." he uses the promise of power to try and lure Sebastian into committing fratricide. Antonio acts savagely and ultimately during this play sees no consequences except from losing the dukedom that ultimately was never legitimately his. His treason towards the king of Naples would be understood harshly by an early modern audience, and this would absolutely constitute savagery. The inter-aristocratic struggles present throughout The Tempest mirror the real-life struggles of colonial powers. This lends credence to a modern interpretation of The Tempest inspired by the works of writers such as Frank Kermode in his essay published in the 1950s Arden edition of the play. Not only does the inter-actor conflict reflect real-life struggles between colonising powers, but the continued exploitation of natives reflects the horrific practices of colonial powers in the period following The Tempest's publication. Additionally, the actors in these exploitative relationships and betrayals face little to no consequences throughout the play. A post-colonial reading of the play would strongly highlight the savagery exhibited by those least expected to be savage and the lack of consequences they face. The powerful figures are more savage than those whom they exploit.

Savagery is an important contrast to the wider redemptive arc of the play; it is Prospero's forgiveness that ultimately redeems him and ends the savagery committed by his brother. Prospero's recognition of the futility of revenge is ultimately a rejection of savagery. In Act 5, Scene 1, Prospero says, "The rarer action is / In virtue than in vengeance," and through this, Antonio and Alonso escape consequences they arguably should face. However, Prospero's turn towards "virtue" positions him for redemption rather than simply vengefully repeating the cycle of violence begun by his brother. He decides to forgive his enemies, "I do forgive / Thy rankest fault," and by doing this, he positions himself as the most civilised figure in the play and the furthest from savagery. Prospero achieves a Christlike redemption through this play, something that early modern viewers would keenly link to the dominant Christian faith of the time. However, it could be argued here he escapes consequences for his poor treatment of others, including his subjugation of Ariel and Caliban and his psychological torture of his brother's party. Prospero is afforded a redemption that Caliban is ultimately not, and modern viewers would link this to the unequal relationship the two share. Prospero additionally, in Act 5, rejects magic and his subjugation of nature. To a Christian early modern audience, his use of magic could be seen as a form of savagery that he has practiced far from civilisation. Prospero in turn states, "I'll drown my book," and by this completes a return to early modern civilisation. In the eyes of an early modern audience, Prospero manages to completely abandon savagery while facing ultimately no consequences due to his mercy.

