Production Distinctive features Director: Peter Greenaway 
Prospero - John Gielgud
Miranda - Isabelle Pasco 
Caliban - Michael Clark 
Antonio - Tom Bell 
Gonzalo - Erland Josephson
Alonso - Michel Blanc
Sebastian - Kenneth Cranham
Ferdinand - Mark Rylance


Prospero's Books, 1991 film * Prospero's Books is very much an adaptation of Shakespeare's play. Initially, Gielgud speaks every line of the play alongside the actor playing the other characters. Thus Greenaway's premiss is dependent on the idea that Prospero is a portrait of Shakespeare himself, but Shakespeare in the film is transformed into a Renaissance mage. (Much of the imagery of the film is drawn from Old Master paintings, most notably St. Jerome in his Study by Antonella da Messina, c.1474.)
* In the film, Prospero is Shakespeare himself, conceiving, designing, rehearsing, directing and performing the story's action as it unfolds and in the end, sitting down to write the completed work.
* The "spirits" of the island are represented by a huge number of extras, all of whom are naked throughout. This allows Greenaway to refer time and again in the film to Old Master paintings.
* The film is formally innovative, combining mime, dance, opera, and animation. The films editing makes extensive use of digital image manipulation often overlaying multiple moving and still pictures with animations.  
* Ariel is played by three young boys. The opening scene sees the youngest of these urinate on a paper boat, mimicking the tempest of the play's title.Director: Rupert Goold 
Prospero - Patrick Stewart
Miranda - Mariah Gale
Ariel - Julian Bleach
Caliban - John Light 
Antonio - Ken Bones 
Gonzalo - James Hayes
Alonso - Finbar Lynch
Sebastian - John Hopkins
Ferdinand - John Court

RSC 2006 [theatre] * Goold's island was an Arctic wilderness with mariners in oilskins. The play is set in an icy wasteland, the visiting Italians are dressed as early 20th century polar explorers. 
* The play opens with a shipping forecast and a gauze showing a radio and the interior of the mariners' ship. (The mise en scene owed a great deal to the films of Wes Anderson.) Through the radio's speaker, the audience glimpsed the last moments on-board before the shipwreck. Projections of waves on moving curtains created atmospheric scene changes. 
* Patrick Stewart's Prospero wore furs and had delicate tattooed patterns running across his head, inspired by traditional Inuit designs. Caliban was a strong wild-man in shackles and Ariel was a drifting black-robed figure with a ghostly white face. Ariel first appeared as a head emerging from a barrel in Prospero's log-cabin cell, and, in a genuinely terrifying representation of Ariel as a harpy in Act 3, Scene 3, he later emerged from a whale carcass, dripping blood and bones. 
* Mariah Gale played Miranda as a person who had been rendered completely without social skills by her isolation on the island. Preternaturally still - almost her father's marionette - she kisses Antonio on the lips after delivering "O brave new world/That has such people in't..." (V.i.183-184). Director: Jeremy Herrin 
Prospero - Roger Allam
Miranda - Jessie Buckley
Ariel - Colin Morgan
Caliban - James Garnon 
Ferdinand - Joshua James

The Globe Theatre 2013 [theatre] * Allam's "Prospero seems a kindly, sardonic bookish presence, keenly aware that his project might founder [at] any moment. His rich voice, comic timing and touching anxiety over the blooming relationship between his daughter Miranda and the shipwrecked Ferdinand make him poignantly humane, as does his evident regret as he relinquishes his power..." (FT review, 5/5/2013, Sarah Hemming)
* Jessie Buckley's Miranda is feisty, keen to reclaim her own personal history from her father in I.ii and outraged at his refusal to share details of their earlier life in Milan with her.
* "What we don't get is an engagement with the deeper, darker waters of the play, with Prospero's troubling treatment of Caliban and Ariel...There's the smugness of the colonial who assumes that his control is justified by his assumed superiority, but nothing too disturbing..." (Hemming)  Director: Julie Taymor 
Prospera - Helen Mirren
Miranda - Felicity Jones
Ariel - Ben Whishaw
Caliban - Djimon Hounsou 
Antonio - Chris Cooper 
Gonzalo - Tom Conti
Alonso - David Strathairn
Sebastian - Alan Cumming
Ferdinand - Reeve Carney
Trinculo - Russell Brand 
Stephano - Alfred Molina

2010 film* Helen Mirren is "Prospera", the gender switch "doing the play no violence" according to The New Yorker's David Denby.
* The Guardian's film critic Philip French was of the opinion that while Mirren's casting "necessitates a little fiddling with the text, which is more than made up for by Mirren's commanding presence, the sensitive delivery of her lines and the way she imbues with warmth and humour a character usually played as bitter and aloof..." 
* But, according to French "...the villains do not come over with any force: the low-life figures (Alfred Molina and Russell Brand) are as unfunny as ever, the romantic young couple are insipid, and the magnificent Beninese actor Djimon Hounsou as Caliban is robbed of his natural dignity. The special effects are intrusive and anything but magical and the text is rather curiously edited..." (The Guardian, Philip French, 6/3/2011) 
* Michael Wood admired Mirren's performance, too:
"...she handles one difficult moment with perfect, thoughtful, understated calm. This is another crux in the play, where Prospero, effectively, forgives or pretends to forgive his foes because he doesn't want to seem less human than an inhuman spirit. Ariel, touched by the plight he has been instructed to create for the villains, says that if Prospero saw these bewildered victims his 'affections would become tender', adding: 'Mine would, sir, were I human.' When Mirren delivers the next line - 'And mine shall' - she manages to drain it of all competition or reluctance; she's worked out why Ariel might be right. In fact, her affections don't become tender - tenderness is not Mirren's line - but she does recognise both Ariel's claim to his own feeling and his knowledge of how humans ought to feel. She is saying she will do what she can, even if she isn't generally fond of humans..." (London Review of Books, Michael Wood, 31/3/2011)
* Wood also loved the film's ending: 
"...The [final] credit sequence refers back not to the scene just before it, where Prospero, or in this case Prospera, throws her staff off a rocky cliff, but to her earlier promise, intensely delivered over a tight close-up of her regretful eyes: 'I'll drown my book.' The last part of The Tempest often feels strange in reading and performance because Prospero's forgiveness of his enemies seems so fake, a matter of formal pardon that allows undying hatred to rage on as it likes, but here the emphasis is all on the abandonment of magic. No spells will ever come from that sinking book again, and the renunciation is real in a way the forgiveness is not. It's not clear why the magician has to give up this power, but she unmistakably believes she has to - it's the price of a return to the world beyond the island, and her daughter's resumption of civilised life...." (Wood)
* Wood agreed with French about the comedic parts:
"...as almost always in modern versions of Shakespeare, whether on film or on stage, the comedians aren't funny, they are just doing what they (and their directors) imagine other people thought was funny. It's true that Stephano and Trinculo, in The Tempest, are not supposed to be only funny - they are murderous too - but this makes their pretend funniness all the more weakening. Perhaps they're going to commit a pretend murder too..." (Wood) Director: Sean Holmes 
Prospero - Ferdy Roberts
Miranda - Nadi Kemp-Sayfi
Ariel - Rachel Hannah Clarke
Caliban - Ciaran O'Brien 
Antonio - Patrick Osborne 
Alonso - Katy Stephens
Sebastian - Lucy Phelps
Ferdinand - Reeve Carney
Trinculo - Ralph Davis 
Stephano - George Fouracres

The Globe Theatre 2022 [theatre]* Prospero's enchanted island is presented as a run-down holiday resort, where the guests are boorish and the staff mutinous.
* "...The [production] concept is clear: western tourism is a kind of cultural and economic imperialism, local people smiling through gritted teeth as they cater to the whims of visitors who exoticise and exploit their country..." (Sam Marlowe, The Times, 1/8/2022)
* The uniforms worn by Ariel and Caliban suggest their subordinate status - they seem to be employees of the hotel or workers on a cruise line. Ferdi Roberts's Prospero wears speedos and little else throughout.
* Caliban is no "savage and deformed slave" but is rather a brutally overworked staff member.
* Miriam Gillinson claims that "what's missing is the magic - and the power and grace that the suggestion of sorcery lends to Shakespeare's language. Prospero's book of spells is bound together with a Tesco bag..." (Miriam Gillinson, The Guardian, 1/8/2022) 
* We see the play open on the Italian aristocracy and their courtiers enjoying a boozy party while trapped in a Perspex box before the shipwreck "sees them vomited up onto the stage from shipping containers filled with tiny plastic ducks. Besuited and bantering, [the Italians are] corporate wide-boys whose office jolly has gone awry..." (Marlowe)
* Stephano and Trinculo are depicted as drunken Brits abroad. Ariel "enchants" them with the offer of fast food while inviting them to join in a rendition of the football anthem Three Lions.
* Marlowe describes the production as "a DayGlo romp...leav[ing] little space for emotional engagement and none for wonderment..." Director: Sam Mendes 
Prospero - Alec McCowen
Miranda - Sarah Woodward
Ariel - Simon Russell Beale
Caliban - David Troughton 
Gonzalo - Clifford Rose
Antonio - James Hayes 
Alonso - Paul Greenwood
Sebastian - Christopher Hunter
Ferdinand - 
Trinculo - Mark Lockyer 
Stephano - David Bradley

RSC 1993 [theatre]* Simon Russell Beale's Ariel was the dominant force in this interpretation of the play. He initiated the storm by climbing out of the large theatrical straw skip at the rear of the stage and setting the hurricane lamp, hanging above him, wildly swinging. He spoke and moved slowly and deliberately, maintaining a cold hauteur in all his dealings. There was still an audible gasp from the audience, however, when, in response to Prospero's affectionate words of farewell, he spat in his face. He then stalked away to the back wall of the set and opened a hitherto undetectable door through which he passed to freedom.
* Alec McCowan's gentle, school-teacherly Prospero - an Edwardian gentleman in an elegantly tailored morning coat - was threatened not only by Ariel's unyielding spirit but also by an unusually rebellious Miranda and a terrifyingly muscular and sharp-taloned Caliban. 
* Caliban's prison cell, from which he emerged for his first appearance, was that same theatrical skip on which Ariel had stood. He was forced back into it by Prospero at the end - there was to be no freedom for him. 
* The production's theatrical self-consciousness was evident in the presentation of the masque. Here it was a delightful, life-sized pop-up theatre, with the goddesses played as stiff-limbed mannequins.
