#separator:tab
#html:false
What are some other examples of Sleaze and corruption in British politics?	In 1994, two Conservative ministers were found accepting bribes from Mohamed Al Fayed (who was then the owner of Harrods) in return for them asking questions in Parliament (Cash for Questions) Bernie Ecclestone affair - Tony Blair exempted Formula one from a ban on tobacco advertising, after Ecclestone donated 1m to the labour party Expenses scandalStephen Byers - I'm like a cab for hire. £5,000 a dayHousing secretary Robert Jenrick intervened in planning application to save Tory donor Richard Desmond £45 in tax'Former PM David Cameron was recently exposed by The Sunday Times texting Rishi Sunak to lobby for taxpayer funds to bail out (£300m) Greensill capital. Cameron used his insider status and connections within the Conservative party for his own financial benefit, given he had 60-80 million pounds to gain from this endeavour. Owen Patterson, who was found to be lobbying on behalf of Randox for the rate of £100,000 a year on top of his already high parliamentary salaryAccording to the Times, all donors who gave the tories more than £3m have a peerageRichard Sharp helped Boris Johnson obtain a £800,000 loan, which he did not disclose. Boris Johnson named him as the government's preferred candidate for the BBC chairman role.Boris Johnson placed his father on resignation honours. Liz Truss placed her economic advisors - Ruth Porter, Mark Littlewood
What was the Windrush Scandal?	In 2018, Home office lost documents of Windrush migrants. The Home Office admitted that it wrongly deported or detained at least 164 black British citizens and probably many more They were refused access to public services, threatened with deportation or deported. Used deportation targetsCaused the resignation of Home Secretary Amber RuddThe government came up with measures to provide reperations, but Suella Braverman later dropped them . E.g. establishing an immigration commissioner
Why are statutory instruments a problem for democracy?	Little Parliamentary scrutinyCreate wide powers for the executiveBinding on everyone as though they were acts of Parliament
How many whips did Boris Johnson remove?	Chief Whip, Mark Spencer removed 21 whips after they voted to take control of the Parliamentary Agenda over Brexit. Philip Hammond, Sarah Wallerstone, Dominic Grieve, Rory Stewart, Ken Clarke.  MPs that were seen as being pro remain, would not support governments EU Withdrawl BillShows that government maintains dominance over the commons
What are the Royal Prerogatives?	Power of  Hire and fire (patronage)Dissolve Parliament (call a general election)Ratify international treatiesDeclare war (disputed) (2018 Bombing of Syria) - Theresa May did not hold votepGrant honours
Why was Amber Rudd forced to resign as Home Secretary?	In 2018, Rudd Gave false information about the Government's use of Deportation TargetsShe claimed that there were no targets, but the Home Affairs Select Committee (Chair, Yvette Cooper) found that there were. The Guardian was given emails that suggested that she had known about the targets, but Rudd denied this, and said that the emails had been copied to her but she had not read itBut she admitted to having 'inadvertently misled the commons' so resigned as home secretary
What is the Presidentialism Thesis and who came up with it?	Micheal Foley argued that UK leaders co-opted the tactics used by US presidents to overcome the constitutional limits on their powers. In this context, we can understand the successes and failures of PMsGrowth of 'spatial leadership', a tendency towards 'populist outreach', increasingly personalised election campaigns, the adoption of personal mandates, wider use of special advisors and a strenghened cabinet office
What were some of the scandals exposed by Hancock's WhatsApp messages?	"Exposed by Isabel Oakeshott""What a bunch of absolute arses the teaching unions are"" - ""They really just hate work""There was the joke implying the health secretary believed Rishi Sunak’s “eat out to help out” scheme may have driven up Covid cases Boris Johnson 'nationally distrusted figure' - Cabinet Sec Simon Case"
What were the results of Theresa May's confidence motion?	In 2019, she Faced a confidence vote the day after she lost her Brexit withdrawl agreement, Yet she won the vote by 325 to 306. 117 of her MPs voted against her
How did Suella Braverman breach ministerial code?	2022 - Braverman had sent official emails from her personal email. She was reappointed when Sunak was made PMA report in The Times claimed she blocked the transfer of asylum seekers to new hotels and ignored legal advice that the government was illegally detaining people at the centre - Manston facility  She was accused of breaking ministerial code for attacking the 'activist blob of left wing lawyers, civil servants and the Labour party' - Ministers msust uphold the impartiality of the civil service
What is the Manston facility?	Facility opened on a disused military airfield in Kent to process migrants. Only meant to stay there for 24 hours for security and identity checks before being moved to longer term accomodation. MP for the area, Roger Gale spoke out about the conditions being inhumane. Over 4000 people were reported to be staying at the facility, despite the Home office declairing it fit for 1000 - 1600. Children forced to sleep on floor as reports that people were staying there for over a month. Reports that the facility is unfit was dismissed as baseless by Suella Braverman. Diptheria and disease meant that a 31 year old man from Iraq died. The home office denied responsibility When asked by chair of Home Affairs select Committee Diana Johnson how this happened, Braverman blamed those who crossed the Channel in small boats
How much has the government given to Rwanda for the scheme so far?	£140million. Yet not a single person has been sent to Rwanda due to ECHR
Why did Dominic Raab have to resign (needs updating)	Bullying - accusations that he 'ruined lives', made members of staff cry. His conduct was belittling.
Did Pritti Patel resign after she broke the Ministerial Code?	She did resign after conducting secret talks with Israeli officisksNo, she was found to bully her staff members, but she did not resign
Why did Estelle Morris resign in 2002?	Estelle Morris – In 2002 Estelle Morris was the Education Secretary. She had made a commitment to oversee a rise in literacy levels but was not able to achieve this.     Subsequently, she suddenly resigned following issues around A-Level marking by refreshingly admitting that she was just not up to the job.
Why did Tony Blair sack Charles Clarke?	In 2006 Tony Blair sacked Charles Clarke as Home Secretary since he could not satisfactorily explain why the Home Office had not considered deporting 10,000 prisoners when they had completed their sentences  Home office could
How does Walter Bahehot (1867) view the Prime Minister?	As 'primus inter pares' or 'first among equals'
What are the roles of the PM?	Form a government - PM has the power of patronageDirect government policy Manage the cabinet system Control Parliament - whip systemProvide national leadership
What are the factors that are taken into account when the PM appoints ministers?	Close allies.Gordon Brown and Tony Blair were both elected in 1983 and shared an office. Cameron and Osbourne had been friends since universityBig beasts - usually difficult to leave out from cabinet. Theresa May appointed Boris Johnson because of his standing in the partySometimes rivals are included to silence them, as they are bound by CMR. Ability Ed Miliband was nicknamed 'brain' because of his exceptional abilityGordon Brown made Mandelson a peer in 2008 to bring him into his cabinet. Balancing 'wings' of the partyMay had to ensure both leaves and remainers were in the cabinet. Sunak appointed Braverman to appeal to right. Blair had Prescott to appeal to the leftTo make sure that cabinet is socially balanced. Johnson's cabinet included many from ethnic minority backgrounds - Patel, Javid, Sunak, Kwarteng (business secretary)
What are the four models of executive power?	Cabinet government (Bagehot, 1867) - Primus inter pares. Cabinet is where policy is determined. Prime Mininster relies on cabinet to maintain authority. Prime Ministerial government (Crossman, 1963) - cabinet government has become prime ministerial government. Post war PMs dominate executive and ParliamentPresidentialism (Foley, 1993) - Spatial leadership. Populist outreach. Dirigeste approach. Core executive model (Smith, 1999) - Power is distributed amongst a variety of key actors, flows over time. Power 'waxes and wanes' (George Jones,
What are the signs of growing presidentialism in UK politics?	Growth of 'spatial leadership'Prime Ministers distancing themselves from their party. - Thatcher was the 'grocers daughter'. Blair is 'New Labour' and not beholden to unions.  Tendency towards 'populist outreach' Growing tendency for PM to speak for the nation in major events. E.g. Blair, Diana. Johnson during Covid Pandemic. Dirigeste approach  Strong, forceful driven approach to legislation. Domineering.  Personalised election campaign - Media portrays elections as battles between PM and leader of opposition. Party leader becomes the 'brand image' off the government and determine outcomes.Personal mandate Trend has led Prime Ministers to claim a personal mandate. Johnson and Truss did this. Wider use of spcial advisers instead of cabinet, ministers or senior civil servants. Alastair Campbell was known as the real deputy Prime MinisterDominic Cummings. Strenghened cabinet office Has become a small scale Prime Minister's department responsible for co-ordinating the rest of Whitehall
Why was Tony Blair accused of presidentialism?	After 9/11, surrounded himself with special adviers and not consulting cabinet. Cabinet meetings were short and advisory, decisions were made elsewhere. - sofa government. He did not consult cabinet on the decision to make the Bank of England Independent - 'they'll agree'. Rarely attended Parliament, except at PMQs
Key debate - How important is the cabinet?	AgainstFor                 Cabinet has become merely a 'rubber stamp' for policy made elsewhere.Growth of special advisers.Cabinet gives authority to government policy Fusion of powers - decisions have to be approved by cabinet. A prime minister can manipulate the outcome of policy discussion through bilateral meetings with ministers, to bypass cabinet. Blair was very keen on this. However, cabinet still makes some key decisions e.g. Cabinet members decided to hold a snap election in 2017PM controls the working of cabinetDecides agenda, chairs meetings, concludes. Thatcher dominatedThe doctrine of CMR gives the PM the power to silence dissenters 'Big beasts' provide a balance to the PM and maket he cabinet more powerful. They are hard to silence.E.g. Johnson, BrownPM has the power of patronage. Means that they can ensure that only those who allign with then. In 1981, Thatcher 'purged the wets' Johnson sacked 27 cabinet ministers over 2 years. Those who ideoligically align are promoted, whilst those who not are removedBig beasts/ depends on the size of majority. Cameron/May did not have this option.Johnson did not show up to COBRA meetings during the pandemic. He missed 5 meetings because he was at ChequersCabinet is involved in managing crisies and emergiencies through COBRA. The cabinet will convene to decide how to address problems E.g. 7/7 Attack, PandemicA PM with a united cabinet behind them is enormously powerfulPrime Minister's are only as powerful as the cabinet allows. George Jones -  'Waxes and Wanes'. No PM can surivive without the support of their cabinet. E.g. Thatcher was removed by resignations. Resignation of Sajid Javid and Rishi Sunak over Chris Pincher led to Boris Johnson being quickly removed as leader
Why was Sajid Javid removed as chancellor?	PM asked him to remove his special advisors. He refused and was sacked in the reshuffle (Feb 2020)
How does patronage strengthen the PM?	Can appoint loyal supporters who share ideological passions. Rivals or critics can be kept out of the government. Ensures that mininsters and backbenchers remain supportive as PM controls their careers and prospects of promotionDangerous MPs can be promoted so that they are bound by CMR
What did unemployment reach in 1983?	Reached 3 million, mass unemployment
What did Thatcher describe the miners as	The 'enemy within'
Why was there a cult of personality surrounding Thatcher?	365 econoimsts signed a letter to the times asking the government to stop the monetarism and end the recession (3million unemployed), she replied 'u-turn if you want to, the lady's not for turning'. War in the Falkland Islands. Her harsh stance towards the Soviet's gave her the nickname of 'the iron lady of the Western world'. Philosophy of neoliberalism and privatisation. In 1984, IRA bombed the Grand Hotel in Brighton where Conservative Party conference was based. Despite this, she delivered her speech the next day. Her reputation as a world leader with a close relationship with Reagan
Why did Thatcher fall from power?	Poll Tax - introducing per capita flat rateAlienated many in her party and aroused controversy. She refused to turn and many were exasperated ERM and EuroPolicy disagreements led to the resignation of Nigel Lawson (1989 )Geoffrey Howe resigned in 1990Leadership challenge by Hesletine She beat him on the first ballot, but it was not enough to prevent a second ballot. Cabinet colleages convinced her it was better to resign with honour
What was the 'Quad'?	During the coalition, policy was often determined by Cameron, Osbourne, Clegg and Alexander.  A style of informal 'sofa government'
How often did the coalition hold cabinet meetings and for how long?	Coalition held cabinet meetings much more regularly than previous governments. They took place every Tuesday for up to 2 hours
Why did the relationship between Blair and Brown deteriorate?	Brown believed that he and Blair had agreed a pact in 1994, that Blair would step down after one term. When Blair denied any such pact existed, relations broke down. Brown retreated to the treasury and played power games, refused to tell details of the budgetRefused funding for any projects he believed came from 'Blairites'. John Prescott, deputy PM was often called in to mediate.Brown tried to blackmail Blair. He threatened to call an inquiry into cash for HonoursAt times they had to be physically seperatedEndless machinations by Brown to try and depose Tony Blair.
What were some of Tony Blair's successes?	The New Deal windfall tax. Handling of Princess Diana Constitutional reform - Devolution, London Mayor, House of LordsGood Friday AgreementReforms to education and the NHS (private finance initiatives)Minimum wage, free nursery places and sure start. Debt cancellation Foreign interventions in Kosovo and Sierra LeoneDevolution Independence of bank of England
Why did Blair fall from power?	War in Iraq. - Dodgy intelligence, no weapons of mass destruction were found, the situation in Iraq turned into mayhem. Believed to have been 'sexed up'Increasing authoritarianism upset his partyCash for peerages - Tony Blair was questioned by police officer after Chai Patel had been nominated for a peerage after donating 100k to the labour.  He resigned in June 2007 and was replaced by Gordon Brown.
How many advisors did John Major have and how many did Blair have?	According to the IFG, Whilst John Major had 8 special advisors, Blair eventually had 50
How many special advisors did Cameron and Clegg have?	According to the IFG, by 2014, Cameron and Clegg had about 107 'spads'https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2879483/amp/Cameron-Clegg-break-pledge-cut-cost-politics-number-special-advisers-soars-50-2010.html
Who were Theresa May's 2 main advisors?	Nick Timothy and Fiona Hill
Why did Alastair Campbell resign in 2003?	David Kelly, leading expert on WMDs claimed that that the government had 'sexed up' the dossier to justify invasion. The dossier alleged the Iraqi military was able to deploy some of its chemical or biological weapons “within 45 minutes of an order to do so” Kelly had been hounded after admitting to the Ministry of Defence that he was the source for Andrew Gilligan. It began a crisis between BBC and Downing Street. Gilligan pointed the finger at Campbell of doing the 'sexing up'Kelly killed himself Led to the Hutton Enquiry,
Why did Andy Coulson resign in 2011?	Allegations that he was involved in illegal phone hacking whilst at the news of the world made it impossible for him to continue (2011)He was eventually found guilty of phone hacking in 2014
Why did Damain McBride, former advisor to Gordon Brown resign in 2009?	"On 11 April 2009, it was reported by The Daily Telegraph that McBride had sent a series of emails to former Labour Party official Derek Draper discussing plans to set up the Red Rag blog which would be used to post rumours they had made up about the private lives of senior and high-profile members of the Conservative Party. These false rumours were to have included sexual and personal allegations about Conservative politicians and their spouses,McBride resigned later the same day, and 10 Downing Street issued an apology for the ""juvenile and inappropriate"" emails.[9] Gordon Brown later sent personal letters to those who had been mentioned in the emails,[10] expressing his regret over the incident,[11] but Conservative politicians called for him to make a public apology.[12] Brown apologised five days later while on a visit to Glasgow, saying that he was sorry about what had happened.[13]"
Why did Nick Timothy and Fiona Hill resign in 2017?	Joint chiefs of staffOverzealous, dictatorial approach. Tightly restricted access to May, stopped May from getting advice from Government and party. Snap election was seen as disasterCampaign went badly and dementia tax led to her losing the election
What are the factors that influence power and limits of PM	Personality of PMWhat cabinet and party will tolerate. Discipline is very important Size of majority How popular the PM is How strong is the opposition Media Wider events
Debate -What are the powers and limits of the PM?	PowersLimits                 Patronage and other Prerogative Powers PM has power of patronage. E.g. Thatcher, Johnson 'Big beasts' have to be includedBoth 'wings' or factions of the party have to be included Potential leadership challengers Botched reshuffles can cause problemsMass ministerial resignations e.g. Johnson over Chris PincherPowers over party Party, cabinet are loyal to PM as leader of party. Maintains dominance in commons through whip systemLoyalty depends on the possibility of electoral success. - Poll tax, 1989Backbench rebellions are possible - May/ Johnson had 99 MPs rebel over Covid measuresRisk of leadership challenge - HesletinePowers over cabinet and government  Calls chairs, sets agenda for cabinet.  Establishes Cabinet committeesCollective responsibility Requires Cabinet support on major issuesBig beastsThreat of resignation Ultimately, PM position is dependent on cabinet supportInstitutional supportGrowth of PMs office - No10 policy Unit, Preess Office and Cabinet office.  Increased use of special advisorsNo formal PM departmentPower of other large, rival departments e.g. treasurySmall compared to offfice of US president
What was George Jones' argument? What year	1965 - Elastic band theory. Argued that PM power is reliant on a variety of different factors. It 'waxes and wanes' like an Elastic band. Depending on circiumstances.
What are the three distinctive styles of leadership and pesronality of PM? Who argued this?	According to James Burns (1978), the three types of leaders are Laissez Faire leaders - E.g. Cameron and Douglas Home  Transactional leaders - Leaders who try to uphold collective government by neogiating and balancing major factions and interests against one another - E.g. Edward Heath and John Major.  Transformational leaders - Visionaries, motivated by strong ideological convictions. E.g. Margaret Thatcher and Tony Blair Also could include suspicious and introverted types like Brown and May.
How large was John Major's majority?	21 - created issues throughout the premiership
Why did Gordon Brown lose the election	"His personality - Was seen as a Stalinist, awkward, introverted. Bigotgate""Bottler Brown"" - did not call an election in 2007. Wider events - financial crisis, Expenses scandalAccusations of being reckless with the public purse by the tories.Lack of party unity - Blairites v BrownitesMedia - Murdoch switched alleigance"
What was Theresa May called by the media (John Crace)?	"A Maybot, because of her relentless slogans, lacked humour and charisma'Brexit means Brexit.' ""Strong and Stable""""No deal is better than a bad deal""""Nothing has changed""She admitted to a TV interviewer that the naughtiest thing she ever did was 'running through fields of wheat'"
How did coalition constrain Cameron's power of patronage?	Nick Clegg was made deputy PMFour other Liberal democrats were appointed to cabinetCameron could not shuffle or remove Clegg and his ministersSometimes coalition MPs would criticise the government - loosening of CMR
Can the executive declare military intervention without the consent of Parliament?	In 2003, Tony Blair sought the permission of Parliament. This passed with the help of the Tories, despite 121 Labour MPs rebellingIn 2013, Cameron asked the Commons to approve a motion for military action against Syria. The government was defeated and Cameron respected the will of ParliamentIn 2015, MPs voted to approve air strikes in Syria after a 10 hour debate in the commons. But, Theresa May did not consult Parliament in 2018 over the UK joining air straikes against Syria, saying it was 'legally and morally right'
What is the cabinet office? What is the role of the cabinet sec?	The most senior Civil Service adviser to the PM and Cabinet. They often act as one of the PM's senior advisors on the working of government and major policy decisionsCurrently Simon case        The Cabinet Office has three key roles:   ▪ To support the Prime Minister as leader of the Government ▪ To support the Cabinet in its implementation of policy  ▪ To coordinate intelligence of security matters           The Cabinet Secretary also sits on Cabinet Meetings and takes the Minutes of those meetings. The Cabinet Secretary will also often be used by the Prime Minister as an impartial arbitrator of political disagreements between Ministers.
What are the 2 main features of individual ministerial responsibility?	Ministers are responsible for and accountable to Parliament for the policies and actions of their department. This is reflected in an obligation to inform and explain, but also resignation in the exent of blunders and policy failures. It implies that civil servants are loyal to their minister.
Why did Peter Mandelson resign in 1999?	Resigned as Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, for failing to disclose a substantial loan by a Cabinet colleague in 1999.
Why did Micheal Fallon resign in 2017?	Michael Fallon resigned as defence secretary, admitting that his behaviour towards women in the past has “fallen short”, as the Conservatives struggle to contain the growing scandal about sexual harassment at Westminster.
Why is collective ministerial responsibility important?	Ensures that government is collectively responsible to Parliament and ministers present a united front. Discussions inside Cabinet remain private and conflict remains confidential. Any member who is unable to accept this restraint is expected to resign Underpin PM power by silencing criticsCreates a payroll vote in Parliaemnt and keeps potential rebels in government
What did Boris Johnson say about the Treasury and Brexit in 2018? Did he resign from his post as foreign secretary?	In a private speech to the Conservative Way Forward group, Johnson is heard dismissing the cautious approach of Philip Hammond’s Treasury, which he said had focused on “mumbo jumbo” predictions about short-term disruption, instead of the potential gains from leaving the EU. He also portrayed the Treasury as “the heart of remain”.He accused the treasury of trying to ruin Brexit. Despite this, May declared full confidence in his position as foreign secShe could not sack him because he was a \big beast' and dangerous outside of cabinet
Why did many call on Rishi Sunak and Boris Johnson to resign in 2022?	After they were issued fixed penalty noticies for attending a lockdown breaching party
Ministerial resignations outside of reshuffles	
Why did Priti Patel resign in 2017?	As international development secretary, Priti Patel held meetings with Israeli officials — including Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu — without Theresa May’s authorisation. The meetings, up to a dozen in number, took place while Patel was on a ‘private holiday’. In a following meeting with Theresa May, Patel was ‘reminded of her responsibilities’. Patel issued a public apology, but this did not stem the tide of revelations about her contacts with Israel, including those not disclosed during her meeting with the prime minister. On 8 November, at a further meeting with the PM, Priti Patel resigned from her cabinet position.
Why did Mat Hancock resign in June 2021?	On 25 June, The Sun newspaper published CCTV pictures of Hancock and his aide Gina Coladangelo kissing. Hancock resigned the following day. His resignation was called for by Conservative Party colleagues, Labour MPs and the pressure group Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice.
Why did over 50 Ministers resign from Johnson's government? (58)	Boris Johnson confirmed that he had been aware of the sexual misconduct allegations against Chris Pincher before appointing him to the government. Started with Sajid Javid and Rishi SunakThey could no longer support the government. Record ministerial resignations, more than any Prime Minister
Why did Boris Johnson resign in 2019?	He could not support the deal that May agreed with the EU.
Why did Ian Duncan Smith resign in 2016?	He resigned as secretary of state for work and pensions. He could not support government plans to cut disability allowance and capital gains tax
When has Collective responsibility been suspended in the past?	In 2016, May announced that Cabinet ministers who diasagree with the decision to grant Heathrow an extra runway would be given a 'derogation' from CMR. Cameron suspended CMR over EU membership, allowing mininsters to campaign for either side. Suspended during coalition in certain policy areas. In 1975, Ministers in the Labour government were allowed to disagree publically on the EEC
Why was Jeremy Hunt called to resign in 2012?	Culture secretary Jeremy HuntHunt 'secretly backed' Murdoch's BSkyB bid. He was acting as the arbiter for the bid.He did not resign
How did Gavin Williamson avoid resignation in 2020?	He passed the blame for the exam fiasco to Ofqual rather than accepting responsibility
Why did many call on Theresa May to resign in 2011 and why did she not?	UK border checks on European travellers were relaxedBut she argued that Brodie Clark, a civil servant acted beyond the the guidelines she gave
Debate - Are the conventions of IMR still important?	ForAgainst                 CMR is still important as it is a key element of government unity The cabinet is held accountable through it CMR has come under strain with ministers not disagreeing with eachother but not resigningE.g. Philip Hammond and Dave Davis publicly challenged each other regarding the end of free movement, but neither resigned despite openly contradicting one anotherCMR is flexible and can be temporarily suspended for issues that transcend party policicsCMR is a rule enforced by PMs when it suits them and discarded when it does notIMR ensures that Ministers are fully focused on the work of their departments. E.g. Micheal Fallon, Hancock, They are merely conventions and not legally binding. IMR ensures that those at the top maintain the correct qualtiy of behaviourdata2Minnisters take responsibility by being answerable and accountable for the work of their departments. Only when they are clearly personally to blame when they resignMinisters will seek to shift the blame to to othersto deflect bad publicity Matt Hanock blamed Public Health England, Williamson blamed Ofqual, May blamed Brodie Clark
Why did Robin Cook resign as Leader of the House of Commons?	Robin Cook resigned as Leader of the House of Commons  in opposition to th Iraq war in 2003CMR means taht a cabinet minister who feels that they cannot support the government should resign.
Which lib dem minister weakened IMR	Coalition government can weaken the rule so Lib Dem ministers such as Vince Cable often publicly criticised Conservative Cabinet members during the 2010-5 Con-Lib Dem coalition.
What is the quasi head of state thesis?	The quasi-Head of State thesis. Journalist Peter Oborne criticised the Blair government’s attempt to portray the PM, not the Queen, as head of state.
Why is 'leadership stretch' a double edged sword?	Placing a singular focus on the PM as 'presidential' will leave them exposed when things go wrong. E.g. Iraq, Thatcher and poll tax, Boris JohnsonGeorge Jones elastic band theory
How many staff did Tony Blair have working for him?	The role and influence of the Prime Minister's office was expanded significantly under Blair, who had a peak of 782 staff working for him in both the Prime Minister’s and the cabinet office
How much was spent on a new 'white house style' briefing room?	£2.6 million
Essay plan - Evaluate the view that prime ministers have become too powerful in recent years	Too powerfulNot too powerful                 Presidentialism - spatial leadership, media spin, direct appeal and crisis management. The person becomes the fDouble edged swordWar in IraqJohnsonPoll TaxGeorge Jones - the Power of the PM 'waxes and wanes'Dominance over cabinet due to power of patronageBlair 'oh theyll agree' over bank of england. Thatcher - purging of the wet's'Sofa Government' Wilson used to adoptThe support of cabinet is necessary, or else PM has no power.Boris Johnson had to go quickly after 50 ministers resigned from his government over the Chris Pincher affair. Tamed by 'Big Beasts' - E.g. Gordon BrownGrowth of PM DepartmentSpecial advisors£2.6m Downing Street Briefing Room. Prime Minister is responsible for these advisors and they can get them in trouble. E.g. Andy Coulson became a liabilityNick Timothy and Fiona Hill. Dominic Cummings breached lockdown rules - 'one rule for them'. Tory hypocrisy .Ultimately a PM cannot government without the confidence of party and country - Liz Truss was sent packing in just 49 days,
How was Tony Blair informal with his cabinet?	He asked his cabinet to 'call him Tony'According to Cabinet Confidential His 'sofa government'
Why was Blair accused of circumnavigating cabinet over decision to make Bank of England independent?	Blair made the decision himself with BrownWhen head of the civil service suggested to Blair that he should consult his cabinet, he replied 'they'll agree'The cabinet found out from the press. Cabinet confidential
How did Harold Wilson like to see himself when managing cabinet?	As the 'player manager'. Had many factions within his cabinet He would set minister against minister, to get his own way. They would debate and discuss and it would give cohesion to the governmentThere were many politically embarassing leaksBut, he showed flexibility over the issue of Europe. It meant that Europe did not break up his cabinet. He did not have to sack half his cabinet
How did Thatcher manage her cabinet?	She was determined to lead from the front and did not like internal argument Impatient with ministers who had views that differed from her own. Every discussion began with a statement of her own views. Many resented it and felt there could be no discussion. Many were frightened by her abrasive and intimidating styleBut, she did take advice from her war cabinet over the Falklands war. She played collective leader. - It transformed her standing, but she became increasingly dominantMicheal Hesletine resigned, her cabinet began to disintegrate. Hesletine challenged her in a leadership election. One by one, her cabinet ministers told her to resign. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=omC3xeCZBX0 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FjE080TGEEk
How did Major manage his cabinet	Initially, he conciously reacted against the Thatcher abrasive styleHis cabinet was all male, and known as the chumsHe said 'you don't have to shout and stamp to make decisions'. He is very curteous and patient.But, the consensus did not last. Ambitous young Eurosceptic ministers like Micheal Portilo, John Redwood joined the cabinetHe called them bastardsMany leaks - brought down his government. Conspiring against himRedwood's chief advisor confessed to leaking.Major challenged Eurosceptics to stand against him 'put up or shut up'. John Redwood went against him. He did manage to fend his challenge off.
How did Blair manage cabinet?	Blair prefered to reach agreements in cabinet subcommittees, or on a one on one basis with ministers. Cabinet government was disasterous for Major, so he went against that. Although the majority of cabinet ministers were against the milenium dome, Blair went ahead with the domeVery short meetings became the norm. Things were discussed but Blair decidedHis special advisors had white house style titles and arguably more power than his cabinet. Press sec attended cabinet to prevent leaks. We will lead from the centre and govern from the centre. Sofa government
How did Callaghan manage his cabinet?	Economy was in financial crisis and facing bankrupcy. Callaghan applied to the IMF for a loan. the left opposed the IMF loan and wanted a siege economyThe right argued that the country should stick to IMF austerityCallaghan decided that cabinet ministers from left and right should debate the issue. Every member put in proposals, that were debated. The meetings went on for two weeks. In the end, he secured a loan on the terms he wanted and had a united cabinet behind him.
What was the Suez crisis?	The greatest potential destabiliser of the cabinet system is military conflict. Egyption PM Colonel Nasser - Arab nationalist who wanted to export violent revolution across the middle east and destroy Western imperialism. He seized back control of the Suez canal from the French and the British.Eden was determined to take action. He demonised Nasser and called him a facist. Without telling his cabinet, Eden forged a military plot with the French and Israelis - fixed a complex deal to seize back the canal by military force. British troops landed at Suez. Under pressure from the Americans, Eden was humiliatingly forced to withdraw.Cautionary tale about going to war without support of cabinet
What is the 'Good Chaps' theory of government?	In the absence of clear legal rules, the constitution relies on a shared understanding of what constitutes good behaviour in public and political life, and trust that people in positions of power will abide by that understanding. The constitutional historian Peter Hennessy describes as this as the “good chaps” theory of UK government
Does the 'Good chaps' theory of government still work?	According to Meg Russel, the good chaps theory has been eroded, but it is not due to our uncodified constituion, but rather a more sinister international movement, where leaders do not want to follow the rules and want to tear up Parliamentary scrutiny. Much bigger cultural problem about democracyPoliticans have now realised that the costs for misbehaviour are not that great.
Nigel Lawson on the NHS in 1992	"""The NHS is the closest thing the English have to a religion"""
Why did Peter Henessy describe Boris Johnson as a 'rogue prime minister'	"Described Boris Johnson as 'the great debaser of decency in public and polical life and constitutional convention'. Johnson was fined for lockdown breaching 'abba parties' in the downing street. People were getting drunk“Boris Johnson has broken the law, misled parliament and has, in effect, shredded the ministerial code, which is a crucial part of the spinal cord of the constitution."""
Why did Johnson have to apologise to the queen?	He was hosting lockdown busting parties on the same eve of Prince Philip's funeral. Yet he still did not resign
Why did Owen Paterson have to leave the commons?	Found be the standards authority to have broken rules on paid advocacy. He was Lobbying on behalf of Randox and Lynn's Country Foods, who were paying him over 100k a year. Randox won more than 500m in covid related governemnt contractsJohnson tried to overhaul the Misconduct system to save his MP from suspensionConservative MPs were ordered not to back the standards committees call for Mr Paterson to be suspended for 30 daysThe government eventually u turned due to uproar and Owen Paterson resigned as MP for North ShropshireHe told the ECHR that the lobbying investigation damaged his reputation unfairly
What did George Osbourne describe Theresa May as after the 2017 General Election?	As a 'dead woman walking'
What happened in the case of Radmacher v Granatino (2010).	This was a case involving a pre-nuptial agreement between marriage partners, in which a majority of the Supreme Court justices upheld the principle that claims made in the event of  a divorce should be limited.   Lady Hale was the only one of the nine justices to dissent from the majority verdict. She gave as her reason the likelihood that the vast majority of people who would lose out as a result of this precedent would be women
What did Sajid Javid and Rishi Sunak disagree about in cabinet	Javid wanted to continue Covid testing programmes. He disagreed wth government plans to end lateral flow tests. But, Javid openly supported the policy
Was cabinet involved during the Iraq war?	NO         Although Iraq featured on the Cabinet agenda, there was little genuine discussion around the table, and ministers were denied access to many key documents. The practice was criticised in a 2004 review chaired by former Cabinet Secretary Lord Butler, which warned that the exclusion of the Cabinet from the process ‘risks reducing the scope for informed collective political judgement’.     https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2004/jul/15/uk.Whitehall
What is the Core Executive Model?	Smith 1999 - How things actually workRejects simplistic notions of prime ministerial power in favour of the idea that power is distributed amongst a number of key actors at the heart of government - power flows over time between PM, cabinet, cabinet committees, PM office, cabinet office, party, Parliament.E.g. when Theresa May lost her majority, then the DUP had more power
What did Nigel Lawson say about cabinet? The view from number 11	Cabinet is merely the forum for approving decisions 'already taken elsewhere'
What are cabinet committees	According to Peter Hennessey (2005), these are the 'engine room of government.         The smaller committees formed out of the larger cabinet. They usually focus on particular areas, such as security or health.             According to former Chancellor Lawson (The View from Number 11) Cabinet is merely the forum for approving decisions “already taken elsewhere
What did Margaret Thatcher say at her Bruges speech?	We have not rolled back the frontiers of the state, for them to be reimposed at a European level
Tony Blair famously said We will run from the [...]  Explain how Blair managed to achieve this.	"Tony Blair famously said We will run from the centre and govern from the centre  Explain how Blair managed to achieve this.   Unprecedented Order in Council allows Campbell and Powell to issue instructions directly to Civil Servants. Blair fused the cabinet office with the prime ministers officeCabinet committees - Blair chaired over half of cabinet committees to tightly control policy formulation.  He was the supreme decision maker - His cabinet were opposed to the Milenium tDome, but still went ahead because he wanted it. Did not consult cabinet on making bank of England indepdent. ""As PM i could not waste time having internal arguments"" (Peter Henessy, the Blair style of government)"
What did Blair do to the cabinet office and PM office?	He expanded his staff at No 10 in the Prime Minister’s Office, and fused it with an extended Cabinet Office to form in effect a “quasi-Department of the Prime Minister”Cabinet office was supposed to serve the cabinet. But became a PM officeleading to accusations of having 'politicised' the civil service' (Kavanagh)
How did Chris Grayling breach IMR?	He remained in post as Transport sec despite the chaotic introduction of new railway timetables and other problems associated with the transport department
Why is the accuracy of ministers information to Parliament so important?	Because without accurate information, Parliament cannot properly scrutinise the executive. This is bad for democracy. It is vital for public trust. Raises questions about the integrity of the UK constitution
Why did many think that Theresa May would be a good PM?	She was a 'safe pair of hands'
How can we see Sunak's rightward shift?	Illegal migration bill and expansion of the Rwanda plan Threats to leave the ECHR Sending france half a billion pounds to help stop small boats crossing. Appointing Lee Anderson (30p Lee) as deputy chair of the Tory partyDuring the leadership election, when Truss was on track to win, he calledThe Equalities Act a 'trojan horse of 'woke nonsense'.He vowed in a speech that sex means biological sex.Whilst speaking to Tunbridge Wells, he said that he has actively removed funding from deprived inner cities and moved it back to affluent suburbs (check this)
How economically right wing was Truss	According to the Financial Times, (John Burn Murdoch),During Liz Truss's 49 days in office, the Conservatives became the most economically right wing major party in the developed world
How many cabinet positions were assigned to the Liberal Democrats during the Coalition?	5
What triggered Theresa May's resgination?	She lost the same Brexit deal 3 timesThe first time was the largest defeat in the history of the house of commonsLost by 230
What were the four P's that finished off Boris Johnson?	Partygate Pincher PattersonPandemic
Why did Nadhim Zahawi resign as Chairman of the Conservative Party	He was asked to resign in 2023  Sir Laurie’s investigation concluded that Mr Zahawi breached the ministerial code by failing to be transparent about the multimillion-pound settlement with HM Revenue & Customs (HMRC) reached while he was chancellor, which included paying a penalty.  The Conservative party chair, Nadhim Zahawi, agreed to pay a penalty to HMRC as part of a seven-figure settlement over his tax affairs, the Guardian has been told.  The Guardian has now been told that the former chancellor paid a penalty imposed by HMRC – part of an estimated £5m tax bill.
What did Boris Johnson say about Theresa May after he resigned as foreign secretary in 2018	, after he left, he claimed that:That the Chequers Plan means “disaster” for BritainThe UK will get “diddly squat” from Theresa May’s plansThe EU had been using trickery in their negotiation Johnson had referred to attempts to sell May’s Brexit plan as being akin to “polishing a turd”.      This is why PMs 'keep their enemies close'.
What did a Prankster hand to Theresa May in 2017 at the Conservative party conference after she had lost her majority?	A prankster handed her a p45 (document usualy given after termination of employment)
Why did many call on Boris Johnson to resign as foreign secretary in 2017?	Boris Johnson said that the British-Iranian citizen Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, convicted of spying in Iran, was “simply teaching people journalism” – a statement her family and her employer both said was untrue. His comments were subsequently cited as proof that she was engaged in “propaganda against the regime”.
Why might the power to declare war have been removed from the PM?	Since the Iraq War in 2003 it has now become an accepted convention that military action must be authorised by Parliament. This was very apparent in 2013 when David Cameron held a parliamentary vote to instigate air-strikes on Syria – he lost the vote 285-272. However, Theresa May launched air strikes against Syria in 2018 without approval. Therefore this is disputed
What is the official constitutional title of the PM?	The ‘First Lord of the Treasury’ is still the Prime Minister’s official constitutional title. It is still the title that is on the door of Number 10 Downing Street.
What are the 5 key roles of the PM?	Chief Executive – The Prime Minister is the day-to-day head of the executive and deals with any matters arising and makes decisions on behalf of the rest of the Government.           Chief Legislator - The Government is made up of the dominant party in the House of Commons and the Prime Minister is head of that party. Therefore, legislation in Parliament mainly emanates from the Executive.  Chief Diplomat – The Prime Minister represents Britain internationally, for example, attending meetings of the G7, G20 or other international bodies.Chief Government Spokesman – The Prime Minister is the person in the Government who is most visible to the general population. Therefore, the Prime Minister has an important role in selling the Government’s message to the population, particularly prior to a General Election.  Party Chief – The Prime Minister has to remain as head of their party. For example, at each year’s Party Conference the Prime Minister will give the keynote (most important) address.
What are the roles of cabinet?	▪ Decision Making – The Cabinet used to be the key decision-making mechanism in the Government. Despite a reduction in its importance, it remains a key decision-making, or at least decision-ratifying, machine. ▪ Coordinating Departments – The Cabinet has an important role in making sure that Government departments are working effectively together and giving out the same public message. As such, it is also important in resolving disputes between Ministers, especially when a dispute has become public knowledge. ▪ Forward Planning – The Cabinet provides an arena for discussing the direction of the Government.
Why was there a drift between Michael Gove and Theresa May in 2014?	They had fallen out over the issue of extremism in schools and who bore responsibility for it. Alleged infiltration of islamic extremism in Birmingham schoolsBoth blamed each other's department for the issueAfter mudslinging via the media, Michael Gove was forced to apologise to Theresa May and to get back on message after a reprimand within the Cabinet by the Prime Minister. David Cameron had to ask the cabinet secretary to intervene However they could not be sacked because they were both such senior ministers.
How has cabinet government become less important	The inner cabinet - Small meetings between Senior Members of the Cabinet. Like the PM, Chancellor. E.g. QUADThe Kitchen Cabinet - Most PMs have some cabinet members and a camarilla of special advisors. Sofa government E.g. Alastair Campbell, Cummings. Decision making mechanism which is tightly controlled by the PM. Unelected officials become even more powerful  Cabinet committees and sub committees - Allows the PM to assert personal authority over cabinet as they create the committees and decide who is on them  Bilaterals - Meetings between the PM and individual Ministers. Makes government less transparent
What are the characteristics of a Prime Ministerial Government?	▪ PM is more than ‘first among equals’ – they dominate/dictate cabinet business. ▪ PM dominates policy making – cabinet becomes a rubber stamp. ▪ PM makes full use of prerogative powers. ▪ PM acts as principal spokesperson – media focus on PM. ▪ PM supervises individual departments – ministers must clear important decisions with the PM.
What are the limits to IMR?	PMs can just ignore failings - Patel. Minister's rarely accept wrongdoing because it reflects badly on their judgement and government. They try and push through controversy. Despite being ultimately responsible, Ministers are increasingly able to blame special advisors and civils servants for their mistakes. For example, following the leak of a video of civil servants discussing how to deflect questions about parties during party-gate Allegra Stratton resigned, rather than the Prime Minister. In 2020, following the examination results fiasco it was Sally Collier, Head of Ofqual, who resigned rather than the Minister responsible – Gavin Williamson. Not permenant - only done until controversy is over. Suella Braverman was very quickly reappointed as home sec despite leaking confidential documents. Pritti Patel. Focus on the media appearance rather than integrity
Why is individual ministerial responsibility important (IMR)	Accountability - It ensures there is always someone who is meant to be accountable for everything that happens in Government. This theoretically stops the government from just consistently ‘passing the buck’. Standards - encourages MPs to uphold professional conduct and expert management because they are bound by IMR ▪ It facilitates the work of the opposition – The fact each Government Minister has a direct opponent in the Shadow Cabinet means that they proactively try to justify government policy.
What are the limits to CMR?	Leaks - It is easy for ministers to brief against eachother and maintain 'plausible deniability' due to lack of evidence. E.g. Tony Blair had Gordon Brown leaking against him. Big beasts - They do more damage in the back benchers. They can launch leadership challenges. So PM keeps them in cabinet.  PM authority - Small majority/huge rebellions can mean that CMR cannot be upheld. Cannot remove whips because MPs are needed.
When was the Chicago speech?	1999
Who was part of Brown's 'cabal' of advisors that were seeking to oust Tony Blair?	Ed BallsDavid MillibandDamian McBride
Using the source, evaluate the view that individual and collective ministerial responsibility are too weak to ensure effective accountability.  (Mock Papers 2022)	StrongToo weak                  - Collective ministerial responsibility is still strong in upholding internal order.  - There were internal disagreements over the governments 'living with covid strategy'. Sajid Javid privately disagreed with ending free lateral flow tests, but in public he held the party line.  - If a minister cannot support a government policy, then they will resign. We saw this in 2003 when Robin Cook resigned as leader of the house. When Sajid Javid and Rishi Sunak resigned over Pincher.  - Means that government can be held accountable for actions. - Collective ministerial responsibility is often weak. Was suspended by Theresa May over heathrow expansion and by David Cameron.  - Theresa May was a weak MP, multiple cabinet leaks, ministers disgreeing with eachother, leaking against eachother and abstaining on three line whip votes over Brexit (Amber Rudd, David Gauke) Individual Ministerial responsibility is strong at ensuring that Minister's take responsibility for political failings. They are responsible for the actions of their department.  -  Amber Rudd resigned because she misled Parliament.  - Estelle Morris resigned in 2002 after issues in A-Level marking - Lord Carington resigned from Thatchers cabinet after he was unable to foree the Falklands invasion - Charles Clark  - Prime Minister is the ultimate judge of how IMR is upheld. Ministers often remain in post despite failings.  - Theresa May remained as home secretary after lapses on Border Control. The blame was shifted onto a Civil servant, Brodie Clark.  Sally Collier, the head of Ofqual resigned instead of Gavin Williamson after the A-Level fiasco.  - Failing Grayling remained in post after a number of high profile failures. Personal failings -   Dominic Raab and Gavin Williamson after they were both found to have been bullying civil servants.   Suella Braverman during the Truss administration after she was found to be sending confidential emails from her personal email.  Matt Hancok resigned as health sec after an affair with an aid was exposed.  Michael Fallon resigned as defence sec due to rumours of innapropriate flirtation. Often ignored. Priti Patel remained in post despite the fact that she bullied civil servants.  Suella Braverman has not resigned for asking a civil servant to arrange a private speed awreness course.
	
Evaluate the view that Prime Ministers have too much power.	Theories of power - Elastic band theory (George Jones) vs Michael Foley (presidentialism). Also cabinet government and prime Ministerial government.                    Too much Not too much Power of patronage - gives them the power of promoting people. This strenghens their position because  a) allows them to promote people who share their ideological passions. E.g. Truss and Kwarteng.  b) Encourage loyalty and punish those who deviate. E.g. Sajid Javid demoted whilst Rishi Sunak was made chancellor.  PM can also grant honours. E.g. Peter Cruddas, Evgeny Lebvedev.  Big beasts curb the power of patronage  - Tony Blair had to create balance within his cabinet. So figures like John Prescott and Mo Mowlam were promoted. Had to keep Brown in his cabinet.  Theresa May - Kept Boris Johnson despite him leaking against the government. E.g. 'heart of remain'.  Theresa May kept Amber Rudd in her cabinet.  ToPower to declare war  - Theresa May launched air strikes on Syria in 2018 without approval from the commons  - Thatcher went to war in the Falklands without approval from Parliament  - Blair intervened in Kossovo without Parliamentary approval - However, since war in Iraq, there has been a convention to ask Parliament for permission.  E.g. War in Iraq. David Cameron asked permission in 2013 and in 2015If Prime Minister is an electoral asset then they will have the support of their party - E.g. Tony Blair hugely increased his power through his use of special advisors and smaller cabinet committees.  - Lord Butler criticised his informal government and how he sidelined cabinet during the war in Iraq.  Boris Johnson was seen as a electoral asset so was able to get Brexit done.   Leadership stretch - they will be held accountable for any wrong doing and when they are no longer an asset, they will quickly be deposed.  E.g Boris Johnson.  Margaret Thatcher.
Evaluate the view that since 2015 the UK has seen a return to cabinet government?	Return to cabinet government Reduced Parliamentary majorites  Not a return to cabinet government.                  Coalition - Cameron was 20 seats short of a majority. Had to form a coalition with the lib dems. This meant there had to be a governance by consensus.   - 107 special advisors.  - Inner cabinet Quad. Made most of the decisions when it came to slashing department budgets and austerity measures. - The- Theresa May relied on the advice of her zealous special advisors Nick Timothy and Fiona Hill Boris Johnson did rely on his cabinet. His loyalists were given strong powers. Liz Truss relied on her camarilla at the IEA Why was there no cabinet government pre-2010? - Gordon Brown was dubbed a 'stalinist'  - Tony Blair 'we will run from the centre and govern from the centre. 'i could not waste time with internal argument. E.g Milenium Dome, Bank of England, Cabinet Committees, Sofa Government, Iraq War - Thatcher - dominated her cabinet. Did not take well to criticism. Infuriated both her former chancellors and refused to listen to poll tax criticisms, which led to her downfall.   - Why might there have been a return to cabinet government? - Period of coalition means that the government could not rely on a big majority. They had to reach a consensus,
Which lib dem minister publically criticised conservative ministers during the 2010-2015 coalition ? Who did he criticise	Vince cableHe criticised Jeremy Hunt over the handling of the BSkyB Takeover by the Murdochs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ERI-Za25OLk  According to Peter Henessy Boris Johnson is a ...	Rogue Prime Minister
