https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover
Global Politics
2 Global governance: political and economic
● 2.1 Political
○ 2.1.1 The United Nations (UN)
■ Origins and development of the UN, including its 1945 charter.
■ Role and significance of the UN to include the Security Council,
General Assembly, Economic and Social Council, International Court of
Justice including their strengths and weaknesses.
○ 2.1.2 North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO)
■ Role and significance of NATO including its changing role, particularly since
the end of the Cold War, and strengths and weaknesses.
● 2.3 The ways and extent to which these institutions address and resolve
contemporary global issues, such as those involving conflict, poverty, human rights
and the environment.
○ 2.3.1 In particular to focus on:
■ how the following prevents the UN Security Council from effectively
addressing and resolving the issues above:
● the membership and structure
● the use of veto
■ how the following prevents the IMF and World Bank from effectively
addressing and resolving the issues above
● pressure for reform and criticism, including Structural Adjustment
Programmes (SAPs), global economic crisis.
○ 2.3.2 The role and significance of the global civil society and non-state actors,
including non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in addressing and resolving the
issues above.
❓Potential Essay Questions❓
● These below past/possible questions cover the whole of the Global Governance: Political
and Economic topic.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 1
○ Detailed essay plans for the questions in bold are available to purchase on the
Politics Explained website.
○ If you prepare detailed plans for the questions in bold and practice adapting them to
different questions that could come up, you will be well prepared for the exam.
❓Past/Possible 12 Markers❓
● Examine the differences between the role and significance of the United Nations and
the role and significance of NATO. (12)
● Examine the similarities between the role and significance of the United Nations and the
role and significance of NATO. (12)
● Examine the criticisms of the United Nations Security Council and NATO. (12)
● Examine the limited ability of NATO and the United Nations in upholding peace
internationally. (12)
● Examine the main criticisms of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World
Bank. (12)
● Examine the differences between the role and significance of the World Bank and the role
and significance of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). (12)
● Examine the similarities between the role and significance of the World Bank and the role
and significance of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). (12)
● Examine the similarities between the role and significance of the World Trade
Organisation (WTO) and the role and significance of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). (12)
● Examine the differences between the role and significance of the World Trade Organisation
(WTO) and the role and significance of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). (12)
● Examine the limitations of both the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and the International
Monetary Fund (IMF). (12)
● Examine the differences between the role and significance of the World Trade
Organisation (WTO) and the role and significance of the G7/G20. (12)
● Examine the similarities between the role and significance of the World Trade Organisation
(WTO) and the role and significance of the G7/G20. (12)
● Examine the limitations of both the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and the G7/G20. (12)
● Examine the similarities in the role and effectiveness of the G7 and the role and
effectiveness of the G20. (12)
● Examine the differences in the role and effectiveness of the G7 and the role and
effectiveness of the G20. (12)
● Examine the differences between the classical economic development theory and
dependency theory. (12)
● Examine the differences between the classical economic development theory and structural
theory. (12)
● Examine the differences between the classical economic development theory and world
systems theory. (12)
❓Past/Possible Essay Questions❓
● Evaluate The View That The United Nations Is Ineffective And Outdated. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the United Nations Security Council is outdated and ineffective. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the United Nations is effective in achieving its aims. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the United Nations is effective in tackling poverty and conflict. (30)
● Evaluate the view that political global governance is ineffective in maintaining peace and
promoting cooperation to tackle the world’s most pressing challenges. (30)
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 2
● Evaluate The View That NATO Is Now Ineffective And Outdated. (30)
● Evaluate the view that NATO has lost its purpose. (30)
● Evaluate the view that political global governance is ineffective in maintaining peace and
promoting cooperation to tackle the world’s most pressing challenges. (30)
● Evaluate The View That Economic Global Governance Is Ineffective. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the World Trade Organisation is no longer effective. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the IMF and World Bank have done more harm than good. (30)
● Evaluate the view that economic global governance is more successful than political global
governance. (30)
● Evaluate the view that economic global governance is failing when it is needed the most.
(30)
● Evaluate the view that global governance has been more effective in addressing economic
issues rather than human rights issues.
● Evaluate The View That Global Economic Governance Has Been Ineffective In
Tackling Poverty. (30)
● Evaluate the view that economic globalisation has strengthened rather than diminished the
North-South divide. (30)
● Evaluate the view that the International Monetary Fund and World Bank have done more
harm than good. (30)
● Evaluate The View That Non-State Actors Are Effective In Tackling Contemporary
Global Issues. (30)
● Evaluate the view that civil society and non-state actors are ineffective at tackling poverty.
(30)
● Evaluate the view that civil society and non-state actors play a limited role in tackling
human rights and conflict in global politics. (30)
Parts Of The Specification These Notes Cover 1
❓Potential Essay Questions❓ 1
Introduction To Political Global Governance 3
The United Nations (UN) 4
The Origins And Development Of The UN 4
The UN Security Council (UNSC) 6
The UN General Assembly (UNGA) 13
The Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) 15
The International Court of Justice (ICJ) 16
Introduction To Political Global Governance
Political global governance refers to the system and institutions through which states coordinate to
address global issues that transcend national borders. Unlike national politics, where there is
usually a government that possesses full sovereignty and control, there is no world government.
Instead, it is structured through a number of intergovernmental organisations (IGOs) which
provide states with a means to resolve conflicts and work together to tackle global challenges.
They help to mediate disputes, create frameworks for cooperation, and establish rules to tackle
issues such as international security, climate change, trade regulation, and human rights.
In national politics, a government uses the threat of force to collect taxes and make decisions for
citizens, who can’t simply decide to opt out of the law. As there is no world government, global
governance relies on the voluntary cooperation of sovereign states and using international
agreements and norms to steer countries towards working together.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 3
The United Nations (UN)
The Origins And Development Of The UN
The Origins Of The UN
The United Nations (UN) originated in the aftermath of World War II, with the primary aim of
preventing another such global conflict and promoting peace and cooperation among nations It
was officially established on October 24, 1945, after representatives from 50 countries met in San
Francisco earlier that year to draft and sign the UN Charter.
The UN was created as a successor to the League of Nations, which had been formed after World
War I but had failed to prevent the outbreak of World War II. The United States was important in
pushing for the UN, which it saw as essential for safeguarding peace, promoting human rights, and
addressing global challenges through multilateral cooperation. The US’ influence can be seen in
the dominance of its allies in the Security Council in particular.
The UN Charter
The UN Charter is the foundational treaty that established the United Nations in 1945. It outlines
the purposes, principles, and structure of the organisation, serving as the legal framework for the
UN’s operations and its role in global governance. The Charter came into force on October 24,
1945, marking the official creation of the United Nations.
Article 1 Of The Charter Sets Out 4 Key Purposes Of The United Nations:
Reflecting liberal principles, Article 1 encourages states to cooperate and work together to tackle
global challenges and resolve issues, rather than resorting to conflict.
1. To maintain international peace and security, and to that end: to take effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and for the suppression
of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 4
means, and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or
settlement of international disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace;
2. To develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal
rights and self-determination of peoples, and to take other appropriate measures to
strengthen universal peace;
3. To achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an
economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian character, and in promoting and
encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion; and
4. To be a centre for harmonising the actions of nations in the attainment of these
common ends.
Article 2 Of The Charter Sets Out The Key Principles Of The United Nations:
Article 2 is highly important in setting out the principle of sovereign equality of all member states.
The sovereignty of states over their territory and populations should be respected and states
shouldn’t be compelled to act if they don’t consent to doing so.
1. The Organisation is based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all its Members.
2. All Members, in order to ensure to all of them the rights and benefits resulting from
membership, shall fulfill in good faith the obligations assumed by them in accordance with
the present Charter.
3. All Members shall settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner
that international peace and security, and justice, are not endangered.
4. All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any other manner
inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations.
5. All Members shall give the United Nations every assistance in any action it takes in
accordance with the present Charter, and shall refrain from giving assistance to any state
against which the United Nations is taking preventive or enforcement action.
6. The Organisation shall ensure that states which are not Members of the United Nations act
in accordance with these Principles so far as may be necessary for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
7. Nothing contained in the present Charter shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in
matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any state or shall require
the Members to submit such matters to settlement under the present Charter; but this
principle shall not prejudice the application of enforcement measures under Chapter Vll.
The Structure Of The United Nations:
The Charter also defines the structure of the UN, including its six main organs: the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the International Court of Justice, the Secretariat, the Economic
and Social Council (ECOSOC), and the Trusteeship Council. The Security Council, given
significant powers, plays a central role in maintaining peace, with the authority to impose
sanctions, authorise military action, and oversee peacekeeping missions.
The Development of the UN Since Its Founding
● In the 1950s and 1960s, the process of decolonisation led to a sharp increase in UN
membership. Many newly independent countries in Africa, Asia, and the Caribbean joined
the organisation, seeking a voice and support for their development and sovereignty.
○ The UN advocated for self-determination, and increasingly focused on fostering
economic and social progress to tackle global inequality.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 5
○ By the 1960s, the General Assembly had become more representative of global
interests, with a growing emphasis on poverty alleviation and anti-colonialism.
● During the Cold War, the UN’s work was shaped by tensions between the US and the
Soviet Union, which often led to gridlock in the Security Council. However, the end of the
Cold War in the early 1990s saw a surge in UN activity and membership from former Soviet
republics and Eastern European states.
○ This period also witnessed an increase in peacekeeping missions, as the UN took
on new responsibilities in conflict resolution, post-conflict reconstruction, and
humanitarian intervention, especially in regions like the Balkans, Africa, and the
Middle East.
● Another significant wave of membership occurred after the breakup of Yugoslavia and the
dissolution of the Soviet Union, leading to the addition of new states like Croatia, Slovenia,
Ukraine, and Kazakhstan.
○ The UN’s expanding membership reflected its growing global reach and its role as a
platform for newly formed nations to engage in international diplomacy.
The UN Today
Today, with 193 member states, the UN has grown to encompass nearly all countries, making it the
most universal international governmental organisation. It remains central to global diplomacy,
addressing issues including climate change, nuclear disarmament, and global pandemics, while
continuing to adapt to the needs and concerns of an increasingly interconnected world.
The Three Countries That Aren’t Member States:
1. Taiwan (Republic of China - ROC): Taiwan was originally a founding member of the UN as
the Republic of China (ROC). However, in 1971, the People’s Republic of China (PRC)
replaced Taiwan in the UN and took its seat, including its permanent seat on the Security
Council. Taiwan is not officially recognised by the UN due to both Taiwan and the PRC
claiming to be the Chinese government, despite functioning as a separate government.
2. Vatican City (Holy See): Vatican City is not a member of the UN but holds permanent
observer status. The Holy See actively participates in UN activities and conferences but
chooses not to seek full membership, maintaining its neutral diplomatic position in
international politics.
3. Palestine: Palestine is also a non-member observer state at the UN. In 2012, the General
Assembly voted to recognise Palestine as a non-member observer state, granting it some
rights, but it is not yet a full member due to the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the
United States’ (which has a security council veto) strong support for Israel.
The UN Security Council (UNSC)
What Is The UN Security Council?
The UN Security Council (UNSC) is one of the six principal organs of the United Nations,
responsible for maintaining international peace and security. The Security Council is unique within
the UN system due to its ability to make legally binding decisions, such as the imposition of
sanctions, authorisation of the use of force, and the establishment of peacekeeping missions.
The Intended Aims Of The UNSC:
● Maintaining international peace and security: The Security Council’s primary goal is to
act to prevent conflict and manage disputes that could lead to large-scale violence/war.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 6
● Promoting collective security: The UNSC was designed to ensure that global security
would no longer depend on individual countries acting alone. Instead, it would operate
under a system of collective security, where an attack on one member could be met with
collective action by all.
● Enforcing international law: The Security Council was given the authority to uphold
international law, particularly in cases of aggression, ensuring that nations adhere to the
principles set out in the UN Charter.
Membership Of The UNSC:
Since it was established, the UNSC has had 5 permanent members (P5) with vetopower and a
number of non-permanent members. Today, the security council has:
● 5 permanent members (P5): These are the same as the original five: the United States,
United Kingdom, Russia (was originally the Soviet Union), China, and France. Each P5
member holds veto power over any substantive decision.
● 10 non-permanent members: These are elected by the General Assembly for two-year
terms. The non-permanent members are distributed based on regional representation:
○ 5 from Africa and Asia
○ 1 from Eastern Europe
○ 2 from Latin America and the Caribbean
○ 2 from Western Europe and other regions
The current non-permanent members (as of May 2025) include Algeria, Denmark, Greece,
Guyana, Pakistan, Panama and the Republic of Korea, though the composition changes every two
years through elections.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 7
How Does The UN Security Council Operate?
The Security Council is the UN’s most powerful body, with the authority to make decisions that
member states are obligated to follow. It can convene at any time when peace or security is
threatened, and its decisions, particularly on sanctions or military action, carry significant weight in
the international community.
Decision-Making Process:
The Security Council’s decision-making is governed by the following procedures:
● Voting System: For any substantive resolution to pass, it requires at least 9 votes out of
the 15 members. This includes support from all 5 permanent members.
● Veto Power: The 5 permanent members (P5) hold veto power. This means that if any one
of the P5 votes against a substantive resolution, it is automatically rejected, even if it has
majority support. The veto can be used to block resolutions related to peacekeeping
missions, sanctions, military interventions, or other significant actions.
● Sanctions and Force: When it comes to the use of force or sanctions, the UNSC first
seeks to resolve disputes through peaceful means, including negotiations, mediation, and
diplomacy. However, if peaceful means fail, the Council can authorise:
○ Sanctions: Economic, diplomatic, or military measures intended to pressure a
country to comply with international law.
○ Military action: The use of armed forces or peacekeeping missions to enforce its
decisions or restore stability.
● Peacekeeping: The Security Council oversees peacekeeping missions, where UN troops
(often from member states) are deployed to conflict zones to monitor ceasefires, provide
humanitarian aid, and ensure peace agreements are respected. These missions are
authorised by the UNSC, often following a resolution that outlines the scope and mandate
of the operation.
The Role of the Veto:
● The veto power is the most controversial aspect of the UNSC. It gives any one of the P5
members the ability to block any substantive resolution, regardless of majority support.
○ The veto has been used many times throughout the Council’s history, particularly
during the Cold War, when the US and Soviet Union frequently blocked each other’s
proposals.
○ France and the UK haven’t used the veto since 1989 and China hasn’t vetoed
without Russia since 1999. The US and Russia have used the veto power regularly
though, particularly in relation to the Middle East.
● The veto can lead to gridlock, preventing the UNSC from acting decisively in crises where
P5 members have conflicting interests. It was designed to ensure that no major power
would be forced into action against its will, preserving the post-WWII balance of power.
Strengths Of The UNSC
Rapid Response To Global Crises:
● One of the key strengths of the Security Council is its ability to convene quickly and
respond to global crises. Unlike other UN bodies, which require more time and extensive
deliberation, the Security Council can meet at short notice to address urgent threats to
peace and security.
○ This agility is crucial when handling conflicts, humanitarian emergencies, or
situations that require immediate international action.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 8
● The Council’s ability to authorise peacekeeping missions, impose sanctions, or mandate
military interventions allows it to take decisive action to prevent the escalation of violence.
○ When international peace is under immediate threat, the UNSC can impose
embargoes or deploy peacekeepers to protect civilians and stabilise regions.
Legitimacy of Decisions Through Collective Agreement:
● The UNSC’s resolutions carry significant international legitimacy because they are often
seen as representing the collective will of the global community. This legitimacy comes from
the fact that the Council includes both permanent members (representing the world’s major
powers) and non-permanent members (reflecting broader regional representation).
○ Its decisions, particularly when they are supported by a broad consensus, are
considered binding on all UN member states, making them more powerful than
decisions from other international institutions.
● This global legitimacy strengthens the effectiveness of actions taken by the Security
Council, such as sanctions or peacekeeping operations, because they are seen as the
result of multilateral consensus, enhancing the willingness of member states to comply.
● Similarly, the veto ensures that no major power is forced into an action against their will,
therefore preventing the escalation and threat of nuclear war that could occur as a result.
Peacekeeping and Conflict Resolution Mechanisms:
● The UNSC’s peacekeeping missions and conflict resolution capabilities are another major
strength. Through its ability to deploy peacekeeping forces, the Council has helped to
de-escalate conflicts, monitor ceasefires, and facilitate peace agreements in regions where
violence has erupted.
● The UNSC’s role in approving and overseeing these missions demonstrates its capacity to
provide on-the-ground conflict management and humanitarian aid in war-torn regions.
○ Unlike other organs of the UN, it can act to compel states and change conflicts,
rather than relying on states’ compliance.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 9
Weaknesses Of The UNSC
The Veto Power Creates Gridlock:
● One of the most significant weaknesses of the Security Council is that the veto power held
by the P5 often results in gridlock, where meaningful, needed action is blocked due to
geopolitical interests.
○ A single veto from any of the P5 can prevent the adoption of a resolution, even if the
majority of the Security Council and UN General Assembly supports it.
● This frequently leads to inaction during critical global crises, particularly when the interests
of one or more permanent members are at stake.
Representation and Legitimacy Issues:
● The composition of the UNSC is another significant weakness. The P5 structure reflects the
post-World War II global order, but it does not adequately represent the contemporary
distribution of power and influence in global politics.
○ Rising powers like India, Brazil, and Japan do not hold permanent seats, despite
their growing economic and political influence.
○ Similarly, Africa, which contains a large number of UN member states, has no
permanent representation in the Security Council.
● This lack of broader representation diminishes the legitimacy of the Security Council in the
eyes of many member states, particularly those from the Global South, who feel their
voices are marginalised in critical international decision-making processes.
○ As a result, the legitimacy of the UNSC’s decisions and resolutions are disputed.
Inconsistent Responses to Crises:
● The Security Council’s responses to international crises are inconsistent and selective,
largely driven by the national interests of the P5. This creates a perception of bias and
double standards in how the Council chooses to act or not act.
○ The UNSC has intervened decisively in some conflicts (e.g., Libya, Iraq) while
remaining largely inactive or unable to respond to others (e.g., Syria, Yemen),
depending on the geopolitical interests of its permanent members.
● The selective nature of the Council’s actions undermines its credibility and erodes trust
among UN member states. When powerful countries use the UNSC as a platform for
advancing their national agendas rather than focusing on global peace and security, it
weakens the principle of impartiality that the UN was founded on.
○ This inconsistency can result in prolonged conflicts, human suffering, and missed
opportunities for effective conflict resolution.
Ineffectiveness of Resolutions and Sanctions:
● Another significant weakness of the Security Council is that many of its resolutions and
sanctions are often ineffective in achieving their intended goals. While the Council can pass
binding resolutions and impose sanctions, enforcement is frequently weak, and compliance
from member states is inconsistent.
○ Sanctions, for instance, are often used as a tool to coerce states into compliance
with international law or human rights norms. However, in many cases, sanctions
fail to change the behavior of targeted governments.
○ Countries like North Korea, Iran, and Venezuela have endured long-term sanctions
with limited impact on their leadership or policies, while the general population often
suffers the most from the economic restrictions.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 10
● Furthermore, the non-binding nature of many resolutions means that states can choose to
ignore them without facing direct repercussions.
Case Studies Of The UN Security Council
Case Study 1 - Liberia Peacekeeping Operation (2003) 󰏷
In the early 2000s, Liberia was in the throes of a brutal civil war, with widespread human rights
abuses and massive displacement of civilians. The situation called for urgent international
intervention. In 2003, the UN Security Council passed Resolution 1509, establishing the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), a peacekeeping operation tasked with stabilising the country.
The mission was successful in disarming over 100,000 combatants, supporting the peaceful
transition to a democratic government, and facilitating the reintegration of displaced persons.
UNMIL was widely praised for its role in helping Liberia transition from conflict to peace,
demonstrating the Security Council’s capacity to mobilise resources quickly and respond
effectively to humanitarian crises and conflicts.
Case Study 2 - India-Pakistan Conflict over Kashmir (1957) 󰏝 󰐣
In 1957, the UNSC discussed the ongoing dispute between India and Pakistan over the region of
Kashmir. The US and UK supported a resolution that favoured Pakistan’s position, calling for the
demilitarisation of Kashmir and a plebiscite to determine its future. However, the Soviet Union
used its veto power to block the resolution, arguing that it unfairly favored one party and could
escalate tensions between the two countries.
The Soviet veto prevented what could have been a one-sided resolution from being enforced,
which might have deepened the conflict. By using the veto, the Soviet Union effectively forced
the Security Council to approach the conflict more cautiously and diplomatically, preventing an
immediate escalation of tensions between India and Pakistan, two nuclear-capable countries.
This shows how the veto can be an effective tool for balance and preventing escalation.
Case Study 3 - North Korea Sanctions (2006-present) 󰏭
In response to North Korea’s nuclear tests in 2006, the UN Security Council unanimously passed
Resolution 1718, imposing sanctions designed to pressure the regime to halt its nuclear program.
These sanctions targeted North Korea’s access to weapons, luxury goods, and financial
resources critical to its nuclear activities. The sanctions were a clear example of the Security
Council’s ability to unite the international community around a critical security issue.
This being said, while the sanctions have certainly hurt North Korea’s economy, they have not
been effective in curbing its nuclear ambitions, as the regime continues to prioritise its weapons
program over the well-being of its population. This case highlights how sanctions can be
ineffective when targeted regimes are willing to endure the economic costs. It also demonstrates
the limits of Security Council action when dealing with states that refuse to engage in diplomatic
negotiations, even under significant economic pressure.
Case Study 4 - The Syrian Civil War (2011-present) 󰑁
The Security Council’s failure to address the Syrian civil war effectively is one of the most
prominent examples of its weaknesses, particularly the gridlock caused by the veto power. Since
the war began in 2011, Russia, a key ally of the Syrian government, has used its veto multiple
times to block resolutions aimed at condemning President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, imposing
sanctions, or authorising intervention to protect civilians from atrocities.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 11
Despite widespread international concern over the humanitarian crisis in Syria, the Security
Council has been largely unable to act decisively due to the competing interests of its permanent
members. The Russian veto has prevented coordinated action, allowing the conflict to drag on for
over a decade, resulting in hundreds of thousands of deaths and millions of displaced people.
The inability of the Security Council to intervene effectively in Syria demonstrates how the veto
can paralyse decision-making, especially when major powers are deeply involved in a conflict.
Case Study 5 - The US Invasion Of Iraq (2003) 󰑔 󰏅 󰏟
The Iraq War in 2003 is a key example of how the Security Council can be bypassed and
weakened, particularly when powerful member states act unilaterally. In the lead-up to the war,
the US and UK sought UNSC approval for military action against Iraq, alleging that Saddam
Hussein’s regime possessed weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). While Resolution 1441 had
been passed in 2002, giving Iraq a final opportunity to comply with disarmament, the Security
Council was divided on whether Iraq’s alleged failure to comply justified military intervention.
France, Russia, and China - three of the five permanent members - expressed opposition to
military action, arguing that more time should be given for inspections. Fearing that a resolution
authorising the use of force would be vetoed by one or more of these powers, the U.S. and the
U.K. chose to bypass the UNSC and invaded Iraq in March 2003. This unilateral action without
explicit UNSC authoriwation undermined the legitimacy of the Council and exposed its inability to
prevent major powers from acting independently of its decisions.
Case Study 6 - The Russian Invasion Of Ukraine (2022) 󰐮󰑒
The Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 further highlights the limitations of the Security
Council, particularly when a permanent member is involved in a conflict. As Russia launched a
full-scale military invasion of Ukraine, the UN Security Council immediately convened to discuss
the situation and sought to pass a resolution condemning Russia’s actions and demanding an
immediate withdrawal of its forces.
However, Russia, as a permanent member with veto power, unsurprisingly vetoed the resolution,
preventing the Security Council from taking any substantive action. While a large majority of the
international community, including most Security Council members, condemned the invasion, the
Russian veto paralysed the Council’s ability to respond effectively.
This case demonstrates how the veto power can protect the interests of a permanent member
even when that member is the aggressor in a conflict, leading to gridlock and inaction. As a
result, the UN General Assembly took the rare step of convening an emergency special session,
where it passed a non-binding resolution condemning the invasion. However, this did not carry
the same legal weight as a UNSC resolution.
Case Study 7 - Israel’s War In Gaza (2023-Present)
Since the outbreak of war in Gaza in October 2023, Israel’s military campaign has killed over
50,000 Palestinians and injured over 100,000 more. The majority of these have been civilians,
whilst Israel’s military has also caused the widespread destruction of homes, schools, and
hospitals.
Further, there have been numerous allegations of war crimes from international human rights
groups such as Amnesty International, including indiscriminate bombing and the use of starvation
as a method of warfare, by depriving Palestinians in Gaza access to water, food and
humanitarian aid.
Despite this, the UNSC has failed to pass any binding resolutions to halt the violence or hold
parties accountable, due to repeated vetoes by the United States, which is a close ally and
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 12
strong military supporter of Israel. This is a clear example of the failure of the UNSC to prevent
conflict and uphold human rights in relation to certain countries who have powerful allies, due to
the veto power that P5 members have.
The UN General Assembly (UNGA)
What Is the UN General Assembly?
The UN General Assembly (UNGA) is the main deliberative body of the United Nations, where all
193 member states are represented equally, each with one vote. Established in 1945 with the
creation of the United Nations, the UNGA was designed to provide a forum where countries could
come together to discuss and collaborate on international issues. It meets annually, providing a
platform for diplomacy, negotiation, and the development of international norms.
The UN General Assembly’s primary purpose is to promote international cooperation on issues
related to peace, security, human rights, economic development, and social progress. Its
overarching aim is to foster multilateralism and collective action among the world’s nations,
ensuring that all member states, regardless of size or power, have a voice in global governance.
How Does the UN General Assembly Work?
The General Assembly holds annual sessions, beginning in September, during which global
leaders gather to address pressing international issues in the General Debate. The Assembly can
also convene special sessions on urgent matters and emergency special sessions on crises.
Key functions of the General Assembly:
● Passing Resolutions: The UNGA can adopt resolutions on a wide range of topics,
including peace and security, international law, disarmament, human rights, and sustainable
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 13
development. These resolutions, though not legally binding, influence global norms and
often serve as the basis for international treaties and conventions.
● Electing Officials: The General Assembly plays an essential role in the election of key UN
officials, including the Secretary-General, non-permanent members of the Security Council,
and judges of the International Court of Justice. This gives the Assembly some indirect
influence over global governance structures.
● Approving the Budget: The General Assembly approves the UN’s budget and allocates
funds to the organisation’s various bodies, agencies, and peacekeeping missions, giving it
significant financial oversight over UN operations.
States cooperate and align with other states to pursue shared goals. The Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM), for example, consists of over 120 countries primarily from the Global South with an interest
in tackling inequality and promoting the interests of developing nations.
How Important Is The UN General Assembly?
The importance of the UNGA is often debated, with arguments highlighting both its influence in
shaping global norms and its limitations in terms of enforcing decisions. While the General
Assembly lacks the binding authority of the Security Council, it still plays a critical role in
international diplomacy and global governance, acting as the most representative and inclusive
body of the UN system.
Arguments That The UNGA Isn’t Important:
● The main criticisms of the General Assembly is that its resolutions are non-binding.
Unlike the Security Council, which can pass legally enforceable resolutions, the General
Assembly’s decisions do not carry the force of law, meaning that member states are not
obligated to comply.
○ This has led many to view the Assembly as a forum for debate rather than action,
with critics arguing that it often lacks the power to make a tangible impact on
international conflicts or crises.
● For example, Resolution 73/98 was passed in 2018 ruling that Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem and the West Bank, are illegal
under international law. This had no impact on the ground, however, as Israel wasn’t
required to comply and the US has consistently vetoed any binding measures against Israel
in the UNSC.
● Another example is the General Assembly’s numerous resolutions against nuclear
weapons, such as calling for global nuclear disarmament, which have not compelled
nuclear powers to dismantle their arsenals or sign binding disarmament agreements.
○ These examples highlight how the General Assembly’s resolutions often serve as
symbolic gestures rather than tools for enforcing international law or resolving
conflicts.
Arguments That The UNGA Is Important:
● While its resolutions may be non-binding, the General Assembly provides a universal
platform for all 193 member states to voice their concerns, which is essential for influencing
the world to address key issues. The UNGA can set moral and political standards that
guide state behavior.
○ For instance, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), though not legally
enforceable, laid the groundwork for modern human rights law and has influenced
numerous international treaties and national constitutions, including the European
Convention on Human Rights.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 14
○ Similarly, the UNGA has been instrumental in advancing sustainable development
through its adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
■ While the goals are non-binding, they have galvanized global cooperation on
issues such as poverty, inequality, and climate change, providing a shared
framework for action by governments, civil society, and the private sector.
■ The UNGA also devoted a significant portion of the UN budget towards
achieving these goals.
● Moreover, the UNGA serves as an important forum for diplomatic engagement. The
annual General Debate allows leaders from all member states to present their views on
international challenges. This inclusivity helps ensure that the concerns of all nations, not
just the powerful, are heard, fostering a sense of global solidarity.
○ Cuban leader Fidel Castro famously used the 1960 General Debate to criticize U.S.
foreign policy, demonstrating how the platform allows smaller or isolated nations to
voice their perspectives on the global stage.
○ Additionally, the UNGA selects the UN Secretary-General, who often comes from
smaller nations, such as the current SG António Guterres of Portugal.
● The Assembly can also apply moral pressure on states.
○ For example, the UNGA’s emergency special session in March 2022 condemned
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, with 141 countries voting in favor of a resolution
demanding an immediate withdrawal.
○ While the resolution was non-binding, it demonstrated broad international opposition
to the invasion, isolating Russia politically and raising its diplomatic costs.
UNGA Resolution ES-11/8 - Example Of The Symbolic Role Of The UN General Assembly But
Also Of Its Limited Impact:
● On 24 February 2025 (3 years after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine), the United Nations
General Assembly adopted a resolution titled ‘The Path to Peace’. The resolution, proposed
by the United States, called for an immediate end to the conflict and a negotiated peace.
○ Importantly, it showed a shift in the U.S. position, which now supported finding an
immediate peace, even this meant it was on Russia’s terms.
● This demonstrates how the UNGA can play an important symbolic role in demonstrating the
foreign policy positions of the international community and key countries. As the resolution
was used by the U.S. to show its changed position on the conflict, it potentially had an
impact on the Ukraine government’s recognition of the need to go along with peace
negotiations.
○ This being said, it also shows how the UNGA has limited real power as its
resolutions are non binding and can’t compel states to act.
○ The war in Ukraine has continued as before despite the resolution, with Russia in
particular showing no real willingness to end the war.
The Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)
ECOSOC is one of the six main organs of the United Nations, responsible for coordinating the
UN’s economic, social, and environmental efforts. With 54 member states elected by the UNGA for
three-year terms, ECOSOC ensures diverse regional representation in its decision-making.
The primary purpose of ECOSOC is to promote international economic and social cooperation and
to advance the United Nations’ sustainable development agenda. It seeks to foster collaborative
action among nations, UN agencies, and civil society to address pressing global challenges,
including poverty, inequality, health crises, and climate change.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 15
How Does the Economic and Social Council Work?
● ECOSOC plays a significant role in electing members to various specialised bodies and
commissions, such as the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) and the United
Nations Commission on Human Rights. These commissions address specific global issues,
ranging from gender equality to economic reform.
● ECOSOC provides a platform for IGOs, NGOs, and the private sector to contribute to
global development strategies. Its meetings are attended by non-state actors, offering a
space for dialogue with governments to tackle global challenges.
● It reviews and monitors progress on the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) Agenda, fostering dialogue and partnerships to promote development.
● ECOSOC coordinates the work of UN specialised agencies, such as the World Health
Organization (WHO), the UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR) and the International Labour
Organization (ILO), providing policy guidance and promoting collaborative efforts among
member states to meet global development targets.
UNHCR’s Response To Humanitarian Emergencies - Example Of How ECOSOC And Its
Specialised Agencies Promote Peace And Human Rights Globally:
● In 2024, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), a key specialised
agency working under the coordination of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC),
responded to 43 humanitarian emergencies, including 26 new ones.
○ The UN’s refugee agency operated in countries including Sudan, Ukraine, Syria and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
○ In particular, it provided key protection for refugees including access to shelter, food
and legal assistance.
● This is a good example of how ECOSOC (a key organ of the UN) plays an important role in
upholding human rights and tackling conflict and its consequences globally.
The International Court of Justice (ICJ)
What Is the International Court of Justice?
The International Court of Justice (ICJ), also known as the World Court, is the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations, established in 1945 with the adoption of the UN Charter. Based in The
Hague, Netherlands, the ICJ is the only court of a universal character with the purpose of
settling legal disputes between states and providing advisory opinions on international legal
matters referred to it by the UN and its specialised agencies. It is composed of 15 judges, elected
for nine-year terms by both the UN General Assembly and the Security Council, ensuring a
balance of geographical representation.
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 16
The primary aim of the ICJ is to promote the peaceful resolution of international disputes and
contribute to the development of international law. By providing a legal forum where states can
resolve conflicts without resorting to war or violence, the ICJ strengthens the rule of law at the
global level and enhances international cooperation on issues such as territorial disputes, maritime
boundaries, and diplomatic relations.
What Does The ICJ Do?
The ICJ operates through two primary functions: settling disputes between states and issuing
advisory opinions on legal questions.
● Settling Disputes: When states bring cases before the ICJ, the Court’s role is to adjudicate
based on international law. Only states can be parties in cases before the ICJ, meaning that
individuals and organisations cannot submit cases directly.
○ Once the Court reaches a decision, its judgments are binding, and the states
involved are expected to comply, although enforcement can sometimes be difficult
as state sovereignty means the ICJ can’t enforce the rulings.
● Advisory Opinions: The ICJ also issues advisory opinions at the request of the UN
General Assembly, Security Council, or other UN agencies. These opinions are non-binding
but carry significant legal and moral weight, helping clarify international law and guide the
actions of the UN and its member states.
How Much Influences Does The ICJ Have?
Arguments That The ICJ Has Limited Influence:
The ICJ’s effectiveness is limited by the fact that states must consent to its jurisdiction for disputes
to be heard and for rulings to be enforced. If a state refuses to recognise the Court’s authority or
declines to implement its rulings, there are few mechanisms to compel compliance. Additionally,
advisory opinions issued by the ICJ are non-binding, meaning that states can ignore them without
facing legal consequences. This undermines the Court’s ability to act as a decisive force in
resolving international conflicts or holding states accountable for violations of international law.
China and Philippines (2016) Russia and Ukraine (2022) United States and Nicaragua
(1986)
In a maritime dispute over the
South China Sea, the Permanent
Court of Arbitration ruled in favor of
the Philippines, based on
international law under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea (UNCLOS). China,
however, refused to recognise the
Court’s ruling, citing its rejection of
the tribunal’s authority,
demonstrating how states can
simply choose not to comply with
unfavorable decisions.
In response to Ukraine’s claim
of genocide, the ICJ issued an
advisory opinion that ordered
Russia to immediately halt its
military operations in Ukraine.
Despite the ruling, Russia
refused to comply, continuing
its invasion, which highlighted
the Court’s inability to enforce
its decisions when powerful
states choose to ignore them.
In a landmark case, the ICJ
ruled that the United States had
violated international law by
supporting Contra rebels in
Nicaragua. However, the U.S.
rejected the Court’s jurisdiction
and refused to comply with the
ruling, demonstrating how
powerful states can ignore ICJ
decisions when it conflicts with
their national interests.
Arguments That The ICJ Has Significant Influence:
On the other hand, the ICJ’s rulings often carry significant moral and political weight, creating
pressure on states to comply. The Court’s judgments set important legal precedents that influence
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 17
international relations and the behavior of states. Even its advisory opinions, though non-binding,
provide authoritative guidance on complex legal issues and help clarify international law, fostering
greater legal consistency among nations.
Whaling in the Antarctic
(2014)
Costa Rica and Nicaragua
(2018)
Democratic Republic of Congo v.
Uganda (2022)
The ICJ ruled that Japan’s
whaling program in the Southern
Ocean was not for scientific
purposes, as claimed, and
ordered Japan to halt the
practice. Japan complied with
the ruling, suspending its
whaling activities in the
Antarctic, showing the ICJ’s
ability to influence a powerful
state.
In a territorial dispute over the
San Juan River, the ICJ ruled
in favor of Costa Rica,
requiring Nicaragua to
compensate for
environmental damage. Both
countries complied with the
ruling, highlighting the Court’s
role in resolving
environmental and territorial
issues.
In a long-standing case regarding
Uganda’s military intervention in the
Democratic Republic of Congo
during the late 1990s, the ICJ
ordered Uganda to pay $325 million
in reparations to the DRC for
damages caused by violations of
international law, including human
rights abuses and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.
Uganda complied with the
judgement.
Follow Politics Explained For More Help With Your Politics A
Level
🌐 Website → https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/
📷 Instagram → https://www.instagram.com/polexplained/
📺 YouTube → https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQ1FvoFVL4fGJkx6dup3O-w
🐦 Twitter → https://twitter.com/Pol_Explain
🎶 TikTok → https://www.tiktok.com/@pol_explained
https://www.politicsexplained.co.uk/ 18
