2. 

Singh argues that British rule brought many positives. For example, it is argued that the British improved the legal and education system. They would also go on to improve the administrative systems of India and their transport network. Finally, it is argued that the British deserve admiration for their efforts.

This argument is partially convincing. When the extract argues that the British increased the infrastructure available to Indians, this can be seen by the fact that India developed the largest railway system outside of Europe; by 1860 there were 836 miles of rail and 15806 by 1890. Additionally, projects that would create further irrigated land were made, such as the Godivari dam that created 1.5 million acres of farmland. Additionally, it is true that the Raj invested further into education. When the Raj left India, the overall literacy rate was 16%, and in the years 1857-1887, 60,000 Indians would enter university with 2000 studying law. Calcutta University became the largest university in the world by 1900. However, the extract fails to mention some of the downsides of the Raj for India, being almost wholly positive. The ICS recruited mostly from the University of Oxford and required applicants to sit an exam in English in London, making it very difficult for Indians to join. By 1900, less than 5% of the roughly 1000 ICS members were Indian, making it unrepresentative. While there was some investment in the Raj's education system, there was still a sense of underdevelopment. Between 1859 and 1860, the Raj only spent between 0.5% and 0.7% of the national income on education; this is a tiny amount when compared to the 65% spent on police, military, and administration. While the Raj saw some economic development, it additionally lagged Britain between 1757 and 1900; India's GDP per capita increased by 14%, whereas Britain's increased by 347%.

In conclusion while this extract is partially convincing it lacks mention of the downsides of the Raj for India which are notable. In this way it is not that convincing as it is unrepresentative of British rule between 1857-c.1914.

2. 

Nationalism was not a significant challenge to the British empire in the interwar period outside of Ireland. In India, notably, there was a large non-violent nationalist movement using the tactics of "satyagraha" and while this movement would gain some concessions, they were ultimately mostly cosmetic, and they would maintain control with few Britons thinking that India would leave the empire soon. In the Middle East, nationalism can be considered to partially be a threat, as in areas such as Egypt, where independence was gained by 1939. However, despite this, the British would retain control, albeit informally. Nationalism was the most significant threat in Ireland, where dominion status would be gained and then used to gain full autonomy in the empire. Nationalism was a serious threat in Ireland as not only did they gain full independence they further proved to other nationalist movements that it was possible inspiring further resistance. Nationalism was not a major threat to the empire in this period in most areas but Ireland would be an exception.

In India, nationalism grew to be a significant movement during the interwar period. The movement grew especially after the 1919 Amritsar massacre, where 379 people were killed by a police force led by Reginald Dyer. By 1938, Gandhi's Indian National Congress movement had grown to 1.5 million members in the United Provinces, over 90% of whom were from rural areas, showing the increasing spread of nationalist ideas throughout the Raj even to rural areas away from cities. Additionally, Gandhi's tactics of nonviolence and "Satyagraha" made it difficult for the British to respond without losing moral ground. While the original nonviolence movement died down in the 1920s, it returned in the 1930s with events such as the Salt March, where many peaceful protesters led by Gandhi would be brutalised by the police. Despite the growing nationalist movement, it was largely ineffective against the British empire. The nationalist movement was highly divided during this time between the INC led by Gandhi and Nehru-who were themselves divided between visions of a traditional agrarian India and of a modern industrialised India, respectively-and the Muslim League led by Jinnah. There were sharp differences between the views of the INC movement led by Hindus and the Muslim League vision for India. Additionally, while there was more common support for the national movement than previously, there was still a large gulf between the opinion of Congress elites and the masses they supposedly represented, which shows more division in the nationalist movement. The concessions afforded to Indians during this period can be dismissed as largely cosmetic. The 1919 Montagu-Chelmsford reforms would establish the system of dyarchy in India that would give the Indians more power to create laws for themselves. The British would, however, still maintain the majority of the viceroy's council (5 out of 8) and would maintain control over foreign policy, including defence matters. The fact the British conceded this shows that they felt they still had control at this point; this argument is reinforced by the 1919 Rowlett Act. The act was a coercive measure that would put stricter controls on the press, allow arrests without warrants, indefinite detention without trial, and juryless trials. This shows that the British still had a monopoly on violence and power through the police and were fully able to enact domestic acts and use them to prosecute nationalist protests. Additionally, in 1935 the British conceded with the Government of India Act that would allow for further provincial governance in India; again, this shows a level of control that the British felt secure giving away more domestic matters as they were seen as less important. In 1939, the Viceroy of India, the Marquess of Lithlingow, would declare war on the Germans on behalf of the Indians. The Indian army would remain loyal throughout World War Two, and this demonstrates the overwhelming control the British had over the bodies of force and power in India; the Indian and British army and the police all meant the British maintained control. Despite the growing nationalist movement, the British maintained control through mostly visual concessions and a dominant control of force. Despite the further governance afforded to India, the British still maintained full control throughout this period, and thus nationalism was not a threat.

In the Middle East and Egypt, nationalism was somewhat of a threat, but the British remained control over the most important resources in most areas despite the concession of control. In Egypt, there would be a large-scale uprising during 1919 and the presence of the Wafd party that would pressure the British into conceding nominal independence in 1922, with full independence coming in 1936. However, the British kept control of their principal resources in Egypt; they kept control of the Suez Canal and maintained RAF bases and naval facilities in Alexandria. Additionally, in 1942 the British were able to force King Faruq to appoint Mustafa al-Naha as a pro-British prime minister using a tank; this shows the British still had control over Egypt, and the independence they gained was cosmetic and subject to compliance with the British. Thus, nationalism was not a threat in Egypt. TE Lawrence and promises of independence in the McMahon correspondence had stirred nationalist fervour in Iraq and Jordan. There was unrest in both in 1919-1920 after both became mandates of Britain. In 1930 the British mandate would end and the Anglo-Iraqi treaty appointed Faisal I king, and independence was gained in 1932. However, similarly to Egypt, Britain would still dominate the oil industries and retain a military presence. Additionally, the British coup in 1941 serves as further evidence of the strength of British control of the region. In both cases, key points of control were maintained, and the overwhelming power of the empire would still allow Britain to influence both nations. In Palestine, the competing Jewish and Arab nationalism would cause issues for the British in the 1930s. The Arab revolt of 1936 would take 20,000 British troops, and further resistance from Jewish groups shows a lack of plan to resolve the issue in Palestine. However, this does not show a threat of nationalism but rather Britain maintaining their role to balance both groups. Overall, while countries in the Middle East such as Egypt and Iraq managed to gain their independence, the British still had firm control of the region, managing to keep key industries such as oil under their influence. Additionally, the British kept the vital trade route of the Suez Canal as well as many naval and air bases around the region. Nationalism was not a threat to the empire, as the progress of nationalist groups in this area was mostly inconsequential.

Nationalism was the most significant threat to the empire in Ireland. Irish nationalism as a movement was led by Eamon de Valera, who was uncompromising and a charismatic leader. The election of a large Sinn Fein majority in 1918 and their declaration of Ireland as an independent republic led to the Anglo-Irish war, which would last from 1919 to 1921 and was fought as a guerrilla campaign under Michael Collins leadership. The British were unable to fight this war due to the significant economic damage dealt by the first world war. The war would end with the signing of the Anglo-Irish treaty on the 6th of December 1921; this would offer self-government within the empire for the Irish. The six counties of Ulster would opt out of becoming part of the Irish free state partitioning Ireland. Eamon de Valera would use the statute of Westminster to fully separate Ireland in 1931 after renaming it Eire in 1927. The newly independent Ireland would show other countries that resistance against the British was possible even in the case of having a much smaller force than the monumental British army. Ireland's position so close to the metropole was especially troubling and would show that the British were not willing to maintain colonies indefinitely in the face of militaristic nationalism. Further, in 1939, Ireland would refuse to let the British use ports that were agreed to be used in the Anglo-Irish Treaty, which shows Britain's lack of sway over the country. Churchill would offer Ulster to Ireland in exchange for their use, but Ireland refused, which shows England's desperation for Ireland to comply. Overall, Ireland was not only a significant threat because they managed to succeed in becoming fully independent, but they also further managed to inspire other nationalist movements and show it was possible. 

In conclusion, nationalism was not a significant threat to most of the empire in the interwar period. However, it was a significant threat in Ireland, and in other places, such as India, there would be the development of a much greater nationalist movement during this period. In India, the concessions made by the British were ultimately at most cosmetic, and the British still had firm control by the start of the second world war. In the Middle East and Egypt, the British would maintain informal control, giving independence to countries such as Egypt and Iraq but still maintaining military control. Ireland would gain full independence and inspire other movements, so it was a significant threat.
