'British decolonisation between 1948 and 1967 was mainly caused by pressure from nationalist movements.' Assess the validity of this view

Britain rapidly decolonised after the Second World War, notably in Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. While nationalist movements were undoubtedly becoming more organised in British colonies after WW2, they were not the primary factor. Britain's shift towards domestic priorities, especially under the government of Harold Macmillan and Clement Attlee, was the primary reason for decolonisation. There were further international pressures from powers such as the US and the United Nations, but these were not as notable as the situation in the metropole. As Britain refocused itself on the metropole, it was inevitable that the empire would decline, and this led to the process of decolonisation. 

Nationalist movements undoubtedly had some influence but were not the primary reason for decolonisation in this period. In Malaya, nationalist movements gained significant strength and membership, with both the United Malaya National Organisation and the Malaysian Communist Party growing. The pressure put on by nationalist leader Onn Jaafar led to negotiations, and Malaya would eventually gain independence in August 1957. However, this was only after a long and hard-fought campaign by the British against the MCP as a way of guaranteeing economic and strategic interests after decolonisation. The British were willing to give up Malaya if it meant that they were still able to maintain their interests, and they only gave up Malaya when they felt secure this was the case. This shows the British were really threatened by nationalist leaders and were more than able to maintain control as they had done throughout the entire emergency following the assassination of Sir Henry Gurney in 1951. Similarly, Ghana would gain independence under the leadership of Kwame Nkrumah in 1957, but this was only after a long period spent by the British ensuring stability in the colony. Despite Nkrumah's Convention People's Party victory in 1951, the British waited until there was victory with full suffrage in early 1957. This can be seen even further in Kenya, where the violent Mau Mau group was fought by the British between 1952 and 1960, when Kenya gained independence. It was only when Jomo Kenyatta provided the British with a strong option to decolonise too that they decided to decolonise. Further, the British in Kenya were pressured by moral failings, such as at the Hola David camp where 11 people were killed; this was not a nationalist pressure and was instead an issue caused by the British themselves. In Kenya, the British remained in conflict for 8 years before independence to try and ensure stability and preserve their own interests. The British tendency to remain in a colony to ensure stability and thus secure their interests shows a control over the situation, which would indicate nationalist pressures were not highly significant. Further the British sought to avoid situations such as the one the French had faced in Algeria which had been incredibly damaging and long fought. Throughout decolonisation, the British were highly in control, and this meant that nationalist movements could not have been creating significant pressures for the British.

Factors in the Metropole, most notably the changing priorities of post-war governments, were the most important factor in causing decolonisation in this period. The elections of Labour governments under Clement Attlee in the period after WW2 signalled a shift in priority for the British public further away from the empire. The creation of the NHS in July 1948 and further parts of the welfare state caused further economic pressure on Britain. Social housing and further provision for secondary education all added to the large domestic costs after the Second World War, and this meant a shift away from funding the empire. The empire was incredibly costly, and situations such as the Malayan emergency or the Mau Mau in Kenya were expensive due to the use of large numbers of troops. This meant it was more economically desirable for the British to retract themselves from many of their colonies, such as Burma in 1948, Malaya in 1957, and Ghana the same year. It was even more beneficial if it could maintain strong economic ties as it did with Malaya's rubber and tin manufacturing by keeping them within the Commonwealth. Britain's trade with the Commonwealth had declined sharply while its trade with Europe had increased. Britain's imports from Europe had risen from 20.5% in 1948 to 30.6% in 1965, and in the same period its colonial imports had fallen from 44.9% to 29.8%. Britain's imperial exports declined from 46.1% to 27.9% in the same period. British trade falling with the empire meant there was a massive disincentive to keep so many colonies as they were on the whole proving to be more costly. Attempts to invest in many colonies were also largely unsuccessful and proved to only cost more than they were worth. The notorious Tanganyika groundnut scheme cost 36 million pounds only to end up producing a very small area of arable land. This wasteful scheme, among others primarily in Africa, drove local resentment and was pointlessly expensive for an economically declining Britain. The British election of Atlee's governments and then the later election of Macmillan showed a changing political desire to move from the empire. This was exemplified in Macmillan's Winds of Change speech made in 1960 in Cape Town, South Africa. Here he exemplified the growing political consciousness of many British colonial subjects, but contrarily, it was him and his government doing a large amount of work on decolonisation. Macmillan's colonial secretary Ian Macleod would lead the decolonisation of many colonies such as Nigeria and Kenya. The British public clearly supported further investment in the welfare state and other domestic programs. The Sterling Crisis of 1967, where all troops east of Suez would be withdrawn, effectively ended the empire, and this was done in an attempt to save the economy by sacrificing the empire. It was hoped sacrificing the still expensive empire would help stabilise the devaluing pound, and this shows a shift of priorities in governance. Shifts in culture reflected by the 'permissive society' were signs of an increasing modernisation and liberalisation that undoubtedly further pushed for decolonisation. Overall, the changes in priority in the metropole signified by political and economic reprioritisation were the primary factor influencing decolonisation. The poor state of Britain's economy after the Second World War and the reduction of trade with the empire made the empire economically unviable and thus pointless to Britain. The devaluation of the empire was reflected by public changes in culture and voting behaviour. The British public did not want the empire anymore, and this was honoured and reflected by the governments they elected.

Pressures coming from outside the empire were also a factor in decolonisation but were not as significant as pressures coming from the metropole. The growing power and influence of the USSR and the USA after the Second World War were damaging to the empire as they both were anti-imperialist powers. The USA specifically would pressure Britain into decolonisation in most cases. Whereas the looming threat of communism, especially in Africa and Malaya, threatened the British economic interests after decolonisation and thus would incentivise giving independence over to friendly figures. However, for both, there are cases where the British would ignore their influence and would instead decolonise in a way that maintained British interests. In Malaya the USA was encouraging Britain to fight the communist threat of the MCP and in many cases in Africa Britain were able to find suitable leaders such as Kenyatta or Nkrumah. While the UN additionally pressured Britain, it was still largely the British that decided how decolonisation went, and thus it cannot be concluded that international pressures were that impactful.

In conclusion, it is clear that in the period following the Second World War until 1968, the main factor causing decolonisation was changes within the metropole. While nationalist movements were growing and strengthening, the British largely maintained control over the process of decolonisation. Due to the controlled and often slow nature of decolonisation, it is clear that Britain did not face much pressure. Changing priorities in the metropole led to a devaluation of the Empire and thus a push for decolonisation. Specifically, the governments of Atlee and Macmillan pushed for decolonisation with a priority on the welfare state. British governments were clearly given a mandate with less of a focus on decolonisation. International pressures were seen from the USA and USSR, but they were not highly significant for causing decolonisation. These threats more encouraged the British to decolonise well rather than decolonise quickly. Decolonisation was already part of the British priorities as a way to unburden the metropole. Overall, it is clear that the Metropole's changing priorities were the most important factor in decolonisation during this period.





