In this extract, Ferguson argues that Britain was mildly affected by the depression when compared with other countries. He attributes this largely to the dominions and the advent of protectionism introduced by the 1932 Ottawa conference. He concludes that even as political ties weakened economic ties grew even stronger.

Ferguson's argument that there was a redefinition of the economics of empire is convincing. In 1932, at the Ottawa conference, there was an introduction of a general 10% tax on imports with crown colonies being exempt. Britain and the dominions favoured each other with their exports. This was an advent of a clear imperial preference, which, as Ferguson argues, had previously been rejected before by the voting public, such as in the 1906 election, which was disastrous for the Conservatives. This does, in fact, mark a significant shift in governmental policy for the British and was a unique strength of Britain's empire that let them be more adapted for the depression than America. Additionally, Ferguson's argument that trade within the empire rose can be supported by the fact that by 1934, 44% of British imports were from colonies, rising by 7% since the First World War. This shows the effectiveness of these efforts to prioritise and increase imperial trade. Certain products also saw a sharp rise in being imported to Britain, such as wheat, cocoa, cotton, and rubber. Britain's policy had greatly changed from the 1920s, when they largely tried to recreate the prewar free trade system.

However, the extract's arguments can also be challenged. Ferguson's argument that the dominions willingly chose to join Britain in imperial preference is not convincing. For many colonies, they wanted to further develop their own industries, which would be damaged and stunted by tariffs. The 10% agreed at the Ottawa preference marked a compromise rather than a highly willing agreement by both sides. The dominions were not equal beneficiaries. Additionally, there were examples of pre-1930s policies that more closely represented 'imperial preference' economically. Notably, the 1929 Colonial Development Act provided funds to develop colonies. This shows a clear preference for encouraging further economic ties and interconnection with Britain and the empire and makes Ferguson's argument that there was a dramatic shift less convincing. Additionally, the argument that Britain saw a mild impact is not highly convincing. The collapse of world trade meant that one of the main reasons Britain maintained and protected its empire was withering away. This undoubtedly must be counted as a severe impact.

Overall, this extract is mostly convincing. It recognises the shift Britain took during the depression period but understates the impact of the depression. It also overstates the willingness of the dominions to come to Britain's aid in the way they did.
