In this extract, Darwin argues that the main cause for rapid decolonisation from 1945 to 1967 was growing international pressure rather than something from within the empire. He argues that nationalist movements were, in fact, encouraged by growing anti-colonial powers, and this made it difficult for the government to act, leading to a vicious circle of decolonisation.

This extract can be supported by evidence from the period. The argument that there were changes in colonial policy can be supported by the emergence of an emphasis on trusteeship and development, for example, the colonial development scheme, which was granted 120 million pounds to try and develop economies in Africa. Many parts of this scheme failed, such as the infamous Tanganyika groundnut scheme, which caused unrest among the colonised and dissatisfaction among the British. Further, the argument that the emergence of the USA and the USSR damaged Britain's ability to sustain their empire can be supported by the fact that one of Britain's longest-kept colonies was done so due to US support. Britain stayed in Malaya until 1957 despite there being a strong leader at the time in Jaafar. They stayed out of fear of communism compromising British interests and due to support from the USA. In other places where the USA did not support Britain, they left much quicker, such as in Burma.


However, this argument can also be argued against. While the development of nationalist movements accelerated in this period, there were many colonies whose independence stemmed from pre-established nationalist movements that cannot be attributed to international pressures. In India, Gandhi had been active since the 1920s, and the Indian National Congress was established in 1885. The nationalist movement here came far before the USSR's or USA's superpower status. Additionally, in Burma there had been growing nationalist sentiment since the early 1900s (the Young Men's Buddhist Association was founded in 1906), and it was the violence and chaos that largely pushed Britain to decolonise in Burma rather than international pressure. Further, the extract correctly notes the growing domestic pressures but fails to emphasise them. With the establishment of programs such as the NHS in 1948 and the establishment of further education and large investment into welfare, there was growing financial pressure at home that took away from the country's ability to fund an empire. The extract also fails to emphasise the financial impact of the Second World War, which was a massive drain on the British economy. As colonies became less viable economically, they became less desirable. By 1965, 31% of British imports came from Europe, and 33% of its exports went to Europe. Due to its reconstruction and development after WW2, Europe once again became a viable trading partner, which meant the empire lost further significance.

In conclusion, the main reason for decolonisation was not international pressure as identified by the extract but was instead a combination of nationalist movements and largely changes in the metropole. The extract underplays these factors and thus is largely unconvincing.
