'The press and popular literature were responsible for the increase in popular support for imperialism in Britain in the mid-late Victorian period.' Assess the validity of this view.

The press and popular literature were becoming increasingly relevant due to the increase in literacy and political interest due to the Reform Acts of 1867 and 1884 and the Education Act of 1870. The press and popular literature were undoubtedly the most important factors in the increase in support for the empire. Both young and old people were targeted by the press and popular literature. Politics and the politics of Disraeli and Gladstone were another important factor. However, it can be observed that while Disraeli controlled and engaged public opinion, Gladstone was frequently controlled by it while being a reluctant imperialist. Heroes were also frequently influential, and much of their writing and the writing on them was influential during the period of increased literacy in the 1870s. However, the most influential factor was the press and popular literature.

Press and popular literature were mostly responsible for the growing interest in imperialism and were the most significant factor. During the 1860s and 1870s, the empire began to inspire the public further; this was at least in part due to increased press, which was fuelled by further literacy. The Education Act of 1870 increased national literacy rates. The reform acts of the Second Reform Act of 1867 and then the Reform Act of 1884 made the public more politically invested as more and more people were able to vote, increasing interest in politics and the press. The 1884 Reform Act gave the majority of adult males the right to vote for the first time, and this was a significant step in the further democratisation and political interest of the country. The press's coverage of significant events, such as Arabi Pasha's 1882 revolt in Egypt, led to government intervention from a weary anti-imperialist Gladstone. The Daily Telegraph recounted that the rebels had killed all the Christians in Alexandria. A similar situation can also be observed in Sudan where Gladstone became known as the "Murderer of Gordon" due to his slow action on trying to rescue Gordon. This, among other news reports, created a public fervour for intervention and led to the action aforementioned. Popular literature also had a significant impact, such as H. Rider Haggard's King Solomon's Mines or She, which appeared in bookshops and would influence a growingly literate public. Children were also targeted by the new comic genre, such as The Boy's Own Paper, which first appeared in 1879 and glorified stories of bravery from imperialists across the globe. Popular literature not only targeted adults but the next generation to inspire a strong imperialist fervour for decades to come. Contributions from Colonel Baden-Powell encouraged young readers to lead "manly and Christian lives." School books, which would further target the young, also showed up and would further entice imperialism in the next generation. Overall, the press and popular opinion were significantly important in the growing interest in and support for imperialism. They were the most significant factors influencing public opinion about the empire.
 
Politics, and specifically the opposing policies of Gladstone and Disraeli, were one of the most important factors in the increase in popular support for the empire, but not the most important. While Disraeli managed to capitalise on public opinion, it can be seen that Gladstone was often at the mercy of public opinion, and his hand was forced. Disraeli would capitalise on growing literacy rates and gear Conservative policy towards the empire; this would largely begin with his 1872 Crystal Palace speech, where he promised further acquisitions and maintenance of the empire and contrasted himself with Gladstone. This was partly due to the previous Conservative collapse due to the repeal of the Corn Laws and the fact they had not won an election since 1841. Disraeli believed playing the "empire card" would allow his party to win. This worked in 1874, and it would further work for Lord Salisbury in 1886 and 1895. This encouraged further Jingoism, and Disraeli strongly capitalised on the fervour of the people. He lived up to this stance, such as with the purchase of the Suez Canal shares in 1875 for £4 million. Disraeli positioned Gladstone as anti-empire as a way to pit the parties against each other and gather public support for the Conservatives. He also oversaw the naming of Victoria as the Empress of India and pushed the Delhi Durbar of 1877 with Lord Lytton. The attempted annexation of the Transvaal and the Zulu war also took place under the leadership of Disraeli. Gladstone was forced to pick up the pieces of this and would instead withdraw troops and funds in 1881, which was unpopular with the public. His hand was forced by public opinion in the cases of Sudan in 1884-85 and Egypt in 1882, where he was reluctantly forced by public opinion to attempt to rescue Gordon. He was also reluctantly involved in the Berlin conference due to geopolitical and public pressures. His further reform act of 1884 would allow the Conservatives once again to win the election of 1886 due to their imperialist focus. Overall, while Disraeli was able to exploit public opinion, Gladstone was frequently going against it rather than influencing it.

Heroes such as missionaries and explorers were another influential factor, but they were not the most influential. During the 1870s, stories of heroes were widely read in magazines and newspapers, and they further reinforced ideas of British supremacy, benevolence, and heroism. Heroes such as David Livingstone were massively inspiring, and he was the only missionary to be given a national funeral in Westminster Abbey. He wrote many books and became government-sponsored, which was a sign that he was held highly by public opinion and would further increase the jingoistic belief that empire was additionally a good and evangelistic thing. Livingstone is perhaps the greatest example of a missionary and explorer inspiring public love. Burton and Speke were further explorers who wrote extensively on their findings in Africa, specifically on the source of the Nile. While these explorations came before the age of increased literacy, they would cause a sense of excitement about the continent of Africa, and this would lead to a further increase in men on the spot and British public interest in the empire in Africa. Further imperialism in Africa would be inspired by these early heroes, who captured the hearts and minds of the British public and raised themselves to an almost saintlike position for the imperial public. Overall, this was an important factor, but it was not as important as literature, and much of its importance came from later literature.
 
In conclusion, popular literature and the press were the most responsible for the increase in popular support for imperialism. Popular literature and the press were important due to how they influenced the young and old and were important in capturing the hearts and minds of the Victorian public. Politics were often influential but were also often influenced by public opinion. Heroes were influential but were often influential due to the literature that surrounded them. Overall, the press and popular literature were responsible.
