Gender Politics in The Duchess of Malfi and Paradise Lost, Books IX and X

Quotation						Significance				
I am Duchess of Malfi still.					The Duchess's defiance in the face of Bosola's
(The Duchess, IV.ii.137)					terror tactics is truly magnificent and it defies the 
							gender assumptions of the period.

...If all my royal kindred					The Duchess specifically endeavours to
Lay in my way unto this marriage,				overthrow the existing power structures that are 
I'd make them my low footsteps.				dependent upon gender: she is determined to
(The Duchess, I.ii.256-258)						exercise her agency.

...as men in some great battles				The Duchess recognizes the dangers inherent in 
By apprehending danger have achieved 			her assertive behaviour, but she is determined not 
Almost possible actions...					be confined by her brothers' will. The Duchess 
So I, through frights and threatenings, will assay		seems to be energized by the prohibitions that
This dangerous venture...					have been placed upon her.
(The Duchess, I.ii.259-263)  

Were I a man						This comment is made when Bosola is arresting 
I'd beat that counterfeit face into thy other...			the Duchess and her children and at it shows the
(The Duchess, III.v.115-116)				Duchess coming right up to the edge of the
							social rules that defined gender in the early modern							period.

...the devil takes delight to hang at a woman's girdle...		Bosola's misogyny is a function of his cynicism: his
(Bosola, II.ii.26-27)					status as a Malcontent governs his jaundiced, 
							dyspeptic view of the world.

A man might strive to make glass malleable			The Cardinal's comments on woman's constancy 
Ere he should make them fixed...				are an early modern commonplace, but in this play  
(Cardinal, II.iv.14-15)					it might be significant that misogynistic 
sentiments are placed in the mouths of the least attractive characters.

...Let us divide our labours...				Eve's decision to take control and practice 
(IX.214)		efficiency (in a manner consistent with the 	emerging mercanitilism of the period) would be 
							horrifying to Milton's readership.

...her rash hand in evil hour				The adjective "rash" is key here: Milton is
Forth reaching to the fruit, she plucked, she eat:		implying that this "rash[ness]" is an essential,
Earth felt the wound...					defining feature of womanhood.	
(IX.780-783)

...though both 						...so Adam has an intimate relationship with
Not equal as their sex not equal seemed;			God it is implied while Eve exists at one y 
For contemplation he and valour formed,			remove from God: she is an adjunct to her man:
For softness she and sweet attractive grace			she is "The Second Sex".		
He for God only, she for God in him.
(IV.295-299)

...O thou for whom 					Milton presents Eve as perfectly subservient
And for whom I was formed flesh of they flesh,		when she is in a prelapsarian condition. The Fall
And without whom am to no end, my guide			provides us with a portrait of what happens when
And head, what thou hast said is just and right...		woman is left without her "guide".
(IV.440-443) 

...render me more equal, and perhaps,			Eve eats the forbidden fruit, then, as an 
A thing not undesirable, sometime				attempt to seize the agency that she has been 
Superior; for inferior who is free?...				denied: the words "render me more equal" have
(IX.823-825) 	been interpreted as addressed to her relationship with God, but Feminist critics have been keen to
	read it as relating to Eve's relationship with Adam.

Was I never to have parted from thy side?	Eve and Adam's relationship in a		
As good as grown there still a lifeless rib...	postlapsarian condition sees gender as 
(IX.1153-1154)	becoming a source of tension: the idea that gender imposes upon individuals mutually irreconcilable perspectives is anticipated here.	 

												

"...Webster's female characters...suggest the possibility of transcending patriarchal limitations..." (S.M. Stahl)

"...The Duchess of Malfi is an unusual central figure for a 17th-century tragedy not only because she is a woman, but also because, as a woman, she combines virtue with powerful sexual desire..." (Dympna Callaghan)


"...Her wicked brothers are typical of the period in condemning remarriage - they are a cultural commonplace..." (Dympna Callaghan)






